 WHEN CLASSIFCATION GETS COMPLICATED: THE INGALLS "IMPACT-LIKE" STRUCTURE.  R. G. Mayne1 S. J. Jaret2  and B. C. Herrmann1,3, 1Monnig Meteorite Collection, School of Geology, Energy, and the Environment, 2950 West Bowie SWR 207, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, TX 76109, 2Department of Geosciences, Earth and Space Science Building, Stony Brook, NY 11794, 3Devon Energy, 333 W Sheridan Avenue, Oklahoma City, OK 73102.   Classification is a good thing: Classification, at its very simplest, is a way to group similar things together.   In science, it is an essential tool as it provides a framework for scientific discourse, whether you are studying North American beetles, bacteria under an ice sheet, or impact craters on the Earth's surface. However, any scientist can tell you that it is rarely simple.  For example, we can know that a sample is a meteorite, yet have no suitable grouping in which to place that sample; it becomes known as "anomalous."  This inability to classify every object to the same degree as others is frustrating, but if a classification process lacks any rigor, then it will only breed confusion.  The lack of a definition for the word "planet" is an excellent example of this, with many people still not satisfied at the first classification attempt given by the IAU in 2006.   The problem becomes: what do we do with these objects that don't fit any current classification scheme?  Do we adapt and show some flexibility, even if that opens the system up to some confusion, or do we hold firm, realizing that this will leave some things termed unclassified, even when we actually know what they are? Classification of Impact Craters: Hypervelocity impacts involve the collision between a large body (asteroid or comet), which has not decelerated in the atmosphere, and the Earth's surface. Thus at the time of impact, the impactor is traveling at or above escape velocity. This imparts a shock wave into both the target and the projectile. A critical aspect of this is that both materials see a supersonic wave, which imparts irreversible damage governed not by shock physics [1,2]. Currently, acceptance (read that as "classification") of geologic structures formed by hyper-velocity impacts are governed by a rigorous and straightforward set of criteria [3].  A specific set of identifiable damage imparted by shock associated with impacts is unique to shock events and cannot be produced by other endogenic means (e.g. [2,4,5,6]).  As detailed by the in-depth review by [3], accepted criteria for identification of terrestrial meteorite impact structures include:1) meteorite fragments, 2) chemical and isotopic traces of the impactor, 3) shattercones, 4) diaplectic glasses, 5)* high pressure minerals  (typically silica polymorphs, coesite and stishovite), 6)* high temperature glasses and melts, 7)* Planar Fractures (PFs) in quartz, 8) Planar Deformation Features in quartz  There are several items on this list that are widely known to also occur in other non-impact settings (these are indicated by a *).  This demonstrates how important a rigorous classification is, because it must take into account all of the possible characteristics and how they may form.  In the case of an impact crater, highpressure minerals are not enough to confirm a structure, nor should they be, because they could be formed by other processes, completely unrelated to impacts. There are also factors, not included above, that are best described as only "suggestive" of an impact crater origin. These are not part of the accepted criteria for a reason and are considered complementary observations to the above list.  They include circular shape, "odd" brecciation, spherules of glass fragments, geophysical anomalies, and irregular stream drainage patterns.  Unless accompanied by shock deformation, these are not considered definitive proof of impact, because they are not unique to impacts and are actually more commonly formed from non-impact means. Complications: What do we do when an object is found that does not fit current classification criteria, but cannot really be described as something else? LPSC 45 - meet the Ingalls "Impact-like" structure.   The Ingalls Structure is a roughly 2km diameter circular feature found in the subsurface of north-central Oklahoma [7](Figure 1).  It was discovered by a group of petroleum geologists, who noticed that the well-logs in this area were very uncharacteristic of the regional stratigraphy.  Despite being located in an active oil and gas area with over 200 wells present, only 20 wells have been drilled deep enough to encounter the structure and recently enough to have data that can be correlated.  No detailed cores are available from any of these wells.  Some well cuttings were available and analyzed; however, it is hard to establish which cuttings may come from relevant stratigraphic intervals and, despite detailed investigatons, no shock features were found in any of the grains analyzed.  In terms of classifying this as an impact-crater we are left with only "suggestive" qualities. Suggestive Features: The Ingalls Structure is definitely "impact-like." It has a circular shape and a geophysical anomaly can be seen above it in the aeromagnetic map of the Payne County, Oklahoma region (Figure 1).  However, perhaps the most "suggestive" qualities that Ingalls has are the geologic history of the area in which it is found and the unusual stratigraphy seen in the structure itself. Geologically, in Oklahoma, this is a very well understood time period.  There is no regional tectonism or igneous activity that could explain this structure. Cross sections of the area constructed from well logs show that the feature has very abrupt boundaries (Figure 3), which are accompanied by drastic changes in lithology indicative of fault planes not in keeping with the area's geologic history [7]. These will not be discussed in detail here, only a few key details.  1) None of the units in the structure correlate precisely with the units outside of the structure. There are varying bed thicknesses and some units not present outside the structure are present within it.  2) A large thickness (up to 60m) of Hunton limestone is found within the structure, but regionally this unit has been truncated out over 20km to the west of the structure.  3) The Simpson group is present in the center of the crater in a large spire-like unit, suugestive of a central uplift.  This unit is older than all the rocks surrounding it and has been uplifted approximately 150m above the equivalent unit in the surrounding area. This leaves us with an area with regionally undistrubed rocks containing a circular suite of younger strata, surrounding an uplifted older section of rocks.  Any nonimpact explanation would require both extension and compression at the same time.  With no other geological explanation, the evidence at Ingalls seems more than "suggestive" of an impact crater. Conclusion: Classification is a complex process and some rigor is always necessary. The Ingalls Structure does not meet the current specifications to be classified senso-stricto as an impact-crater; however, taking into account the geologic history of the area in which it is found, it is hard to imagine what else it could be.  It is not possible to gather more data on this subsurface feature and gain the data necessary to "prove" its origin. Perhaps, it deserves some leniency, perhaps not, but we do think it deserves some discussion. References: [1] Melosh H.J. (1989) Impact Cratering. A Geologic Process. [2] Kieffer S.W. and Simonda C.H. (2010) Rev. Geophys., 18, 143-181. [3] French B.M. and Koeberl C. (2010) Earth Sci. Rev., 98, 123170. [4] Alexopoulos J.S. et al. Geology, 16,  796-799. [5] French B.M. and Short N.M. Shock Metamoprhism of Natural Materials [6] Shoemaker E.M. (1960) Impact Mechanics In: The Moon, Meteorite, and Comets. [7] Herrmann B and Mayne R.G. (2011) LPSCXXXII Abstract #1032.    