1073.PDF
UNSUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION OF MERCURY'S VISIBLE-NEAR-INFRARED REFLECTANCE SPECTRA: COMPARISON WITH MAJOR ELEMENT COMPOSITIONS. Mario D'Amore1, Jörn Helbert1, Sabrina Ferrari1, Alessandro Maturilli1, Larry R. Nittler2, Deborah L. Domingue3, Shoshana Z. Weider2, Richard D. Starr4, Ellen J. Crapster-Pregont 5,6, Denton S. Ebel5,6, Sean C. Solomon2,6, 1Institute for Planetary Research, DLR, Rutherfordstrasse 2, Berlin, Germany; 2Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, DC 20015, USA; 3Planetary Science Institute, 1700 E. Fort Lowell, Suite 106, Tucson AZ, 85719, USA;4Physics Department, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064, USA; 5Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY 10024, USA;6Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, NY 10964, USA.  Introduction: The surface of Mercury has been mapped in the 400-1145 nm wavelength range by the Mercury Atmospheric and Surface Composition Spectrometer (MASCS) instrument during orbital observations by the MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft. Under the hypothesis that surface compositional information can be efficiently derived from spectral reflectance measurements with the use of statistical techniques, we have conducted unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses to identify and characterize spectral units from MASCS observations. The results [1] display a dichotomy, with two spectrally distinct groups: polar and equatorial units (see Fig. 1). The spatial extent of the polar unit in the northern hemisphere generally correlates well with that of the northern volcanic plains [2]. To explore possible relations between composition and spectral behavior, we have compared these spectral provinces with elemental abundance maps derived from MESSENGER's X-Ray Spectrometer (XRS) [e.g., 3, 4].   Data and analysis: We use a global hyperspectral data cube image of normalized MASCS visible (VIS) detector spectra, from the first Earth year of the orbital mission, to perform our unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis. We reduced the grid resolution to 4°/pixel to improve the spatial coverage of the final map, but at the cost of increased sub-pixel variation. Data coverage varies from region to region, but global maps at 1°/pixel can be obtained with a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). In the absence of a formal global photometric correction for the MASCS data, we have corrected the dataset in an approximate fashion by normalizing all the spectra at 700 nm to account for large variations in observing geometry. We have excluded the most extreme observing geometries by limiting the incidence and emission angles to <85°, which means that latitudes poleward of 80° are excluded. For this analysis we used six spectral channels, each with a bandwidth of 10 nm, in order to focus on "interesting" spectral regions, e.g., bands at ~600 nm that are indicative of sulfides. By using wider spectral channels, we also avoided biases caused by artifacts in the spectra, e.g., the presence of solar lines in the calibrated spectra. The resultant hyperspectral map was then visually inspected to search for anomalies that originated mainly in regions of low coverage or from high levels of spectral variation within a single pixel. Our approach reveals the existence of two large and spectrally distinct regions, which we call the polar spectral unit (PSU) and the equatorial spectral unit (ESU) (Fig. 1). Further analysis indicates the presence of smaller sub-units that lie near the boundaries of these large regions and may be transitional areas of intermediate spectral  Figure 1. Spatial distribution of the unsupervised hierarchical clusters derived from normalized MASCS VIS spectra (overlaid on an MDIS base map). Red pixels indicate the polar spectral unit (PSU); blue pixels denote the equatorial spectral unit (ESU). The yellow circle indicates the Rembrandt basin. 1073.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
character. Comparison with geochemical data: The regional extent of the large-scale spectral units shows good correlation with such datasets as geological unit definition from image mosaics and Gamma-Ray Spectrometer observations [1]. The plains interior to the Rembrandt impact basin (yellow circle in Fig. 1) and the northern volcanic plains belong to the PSU and are both examples of relatively young, smooth volcanic deposits. We hypothesize that the spectral characteristics of the PSU originate from material covering an older ESU. Where ESU material is covered by PSU material, fewer hollows [e.g., 5] are observed, which suggests that ESU material is more likely to promote the formation of these landforms [1].  The spectral differences we observe between the PSU and the ESU are also consistent with elemental data derived from the XRS instrument [3, 4]. In particular, Fig. 2 illustrates several chemical differences between the two spectral clusters. The bimodal frequency distributions (Figs. 2a and 2d) for PSU may indicate that the unit is a mixture of two end-member components. The plot of S/Si versus Ca/Si (Fig. 2c) shows an approximately linear relationship for the PSU, whereas the ESU (with a different trend) shows greater departures from a linear relation. Figs. 2b and 2d, together, point to a generally more limited distribution of Al/Si in the PSU than in the ESU. It is important to note that the chemical differences seen in Fig. 2 could be affected by limitations in XRS mapping coverage. XRS data for the PSU originate mainly from the southern hemisphere, where the spatial resolution is poor. Although XRS data for the northern PSU have better spatial resolution, coverage is much more sparse (other than for Mg). Nonetheless, by comparing the VIS/near-infrared MASCS and XRS datasets and investigating the links between them, we can provide further clues to the formation and evolution of Mercury's crust. References: [1] Helbert J. et al. (2013) J. Geophys. Res. Planets, submitted. [2] Head, J. W. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 1853-1856. [3] Nittler L. R. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 1847-1850. [4] Weider S. Z. et al. (2012) J. Geophys. Res., 117, E00L05. [5] Blewett D. T. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 1856-1859. [6] Nittler L. R. et al. (2013), LPS XLIV, Abstract #2458. a.  b.  c.  d.  Figure 2. Elemental weight ratios from XRS [3,4,6] plotted as (a and d) frequency distributions, and as (b and c) simple relational plots. Colors correspond to the spectral units illustrated in Fig. 1 (blue: ESU, red: PSU). Black histograms are for the overall distributions. The two data sets in (c) have correlation coefficients of 0.65 (red) and 0.42 (blue); approximate linear relations are shown for comparison. 1073.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
