 THE HISTORY OF TOPOGRAPHY ON VENUS. M.A. Ivanov1,2 and J.W. Head2, 1Vernadsky Institute, RAS, Russia, Moscow, mikhail_ivanov@brown.edu, 2Dept. Geol. Sciences, Brown Univ., Providence, RI 02912 USA.   Introduction: Major planetary topographic features are related to both crustal structure and current or past large-scale geological processes (e.g., basin-forming impacts and/or the global tectonic style) that can be dated from different parts of planetary history. For instance, the current bimodal topography of Earth reflects the presence of the thick continental and thinner oceanic crustal components and their rearrangement by plate tectonics. The continental hypsometric mode dates to earlier Earth history; the oceanic mode reflects more recent variations in crustal thickness/spreading rates. Venus is the most Earth-like of the terrestrial planets but unlike Earth it shows no present evidence for plate tectonics [1], currently looses its heat largely by conduction [2], and is characterized by a distinctly unimodal hypsogram [3,4]. Analysis of the global geological map of Venus [5] and assessment of the relative ages of the most important units [6,7] have resulted in documentation of three main regimes of resurfacing, during which either tectonics or volcanism dominated [6,7]. When did the major components (highlands, lowlands) of the current global topography of Venus form and what processes were responsible? Did the major topographic features form continuously throughout the visible portion of geologic history or are they related to some specific episodes? We address these problems through analysis of the topographic configuration of resurfacing regime unit and terrains.  Fig. 1. Crater densities on units from different regimes of resurfacing.  Regimes of resurfacing: (1) Global tectonic regime: Globally consistent stratigraphic relationships among units/structures indicate that such units as tessera (t), densely lineated (pdl) plains, ridged plains and ridge belts (pr/RB), and groove belts (gb) formed near the beginning of the visible part of the geologic history of Venus. Tectonic components characterize the morphology of these units to a large extent and show the dominance of tectonic deformation at the time of unit formation. The exposed (minimal) area of units of the global tectonic regime is comprises ~20% of the surface and they are distributed throughout the surface. (2) During the global volcanic regime, vast volcanic plains such as shield (psh) and regional (rp) plains broadly embayed the tectonized units. The volcanic nature of the   plains is obvious; tectonic deformation played a minor role in their formation, and their stratigraphic relationships with the tectonized units are consistent at the global scale. These vast plains resurfaced ~60% of Venus. (3) Two main units, lobate plains (pl) and rift zones (rz), which have resurfaced ~14% of Venus, represent the network rifting-volcanism regime. Lava flows of lobate plains and structures of rift zones formed broadly contemporaneously and always embay/cut units of both the global tectonic and volcanic regimes. The number of craters superposed on units of the three major regimes indicates that the crater density is highest on units of the global tectonic regime and the lowest on lobate plains and rifts of the network rifting-volcanism regime (Fig. 1). Although the mean crater density on the vast plains of the global volcanic regime is lower than on units of the global tectonic regime, the error bars largely overlap each other suggesting the densities are statistically indistinguishable (Fig. 1). The stratigraphic relationships between units of the tectonic and volcanic regimes, however, are always the same and indicate a younger age for the vast volcanic plains. Fig. 2. Hypsograms of units that constiture different regimes of resurfacing.  Topographic configuration of units: The distribution of the topography of the major map units shows that units formed during the older, global tectonic regime are among the highest and their hypsogram is shifted to the left (Fig. 2). The largest tessera massifs, which likely represent regions of the thicker crust [8], correspond to the right hand portion of the hypsogram where they form an additional topographic peak. These regions comprise a specific class of the regional, plateau-like highlands on Venus that are characterized by a shallow apparent depth of compensation, ADC [9-12]. The other units of the tectonic regime (pdl, pr/RB, and gb) occur at different elevations but as a rule form topographic highs that stand above the surrounding volcanic plains and ~60% of all tectonized terrains lie above the mean planetary radius (MPR, 6051.8 km). The hypsogram of the vast volcanic plains that belong to the global volcanic regime is clearly shifted to the left (Fig. 2) and ~77% of the plains are below MPR. Shield plains preferentially occur on regional slopes of the tectonized terrains of the global tectonic regime and there  is evidence [13] that this unit underlies a large portion of the younger regional plains. Topographically, regional plains are associated with the broad lowlands and ~80% of the plains are below MPR. Lobate plains and rifts that constitute the network rifting-volcanism regime occur at higher elevations and their hypsogram is shifted to the right (Fig. 2); ~70% of lobate plains and rifts are above MPR. These units are closely associated with dome-shaped rises [14,15] that constitute another type of the regional highlands on Venus [9] and are characterized by a large ADC [16,10,11]. Rifts usually mark the crests of the rises and flows of lobate plains extend down their flanks [e.g. 17]. Discussion and conclusions: Units of the global tectonic and volcanic regimes (Fig. 3) comprise about 86% of the surface of Venus. Yet they formed during the first ~30% of the observable history of Venus [18,19]. Tessera, which is the oldest unit, is associated with the largest plateau-like regions that represent important highlands comprising the current long-wavelength topography. Although volcanic plains  commonly occur within tessera massifs, patches of the plains are small and always localized within isolated basins. Thus, the larger tessera massifs have remained regional highs since their initial formation. Other widespread units of the global tectonic regime (pr/RB and gb) form prominent zonal highs that also show no evidence of being at lower elevations than the surrounding vast plains. In summary, the tectonized terrains of the tectonic regime represent local to regional topographic highs that fomred early and existed during the rest of the visible geologic history of Venus. The vast plains of the global volcanic regime (Fig. 3) are associated with the regional slopes of the tectonized terrains (psh) and with broad topographic lowlands (rp). This is evidence that the lowlands were present at the time of emplacement of the plains and that they served as sites of preferential accumulation of the volcanic materials. Thus, the vast majority (80-85%) of the currently observed long-wavelength topography formed during the initial global tectonic regime. Units of the network rifting-volcanism regime (Fig. 3) are closely associated with the dome-shaped rises that represent the second class of the highlands of Venus [9]. The fact that this combined activity resurfaced only ~14% of Venus strongly suggests that: 1) the level of interior activity of Venus as measured by integrated volcanic flux decreased significantly following the emplacement of regional plains, and 2) the style of resurfacing changed dramatically from intense crustal deformation (tessera) and globally distributed volcanic sources and high-flux volcanism (shield and regional plains), to interconnected rift zones and local centers of volcanism. We concur with other workers [e.g., 20] that this distinctive change is consistent with the early phase (tessera to regional plains) representing a major period of enhanced heat loss, while the later phase represents a prolonged more stable period of lithospheric thickening. We interpret the origin of the majority of long-wavelength topography of Venus to be a remnant of the geodynamical forces related to intensive tectonic deformation during the global tectonic regime and the global volcanic aftermath represented by shield and regional plains emplacement. The preservation to modern times of the ancient topography of Venus is believed to be due to rapid lithospheric thickening following the emplacement of regional plains.  References: 1) Solomon, S.C., et al., JGR, 97, 13199, 1992, 2) Head, J.W., S.C. Solomon, Science, 213, 62, 1981, 3) Pettengill, G.H., et al., JGR, 85, 8261, 1980, 4) Ford, P.G., G.H. Pettengill, JGR, 97, 13103, 1992, 5) Ivanov, M.A., J.W. Head, PSS, 59, 1559, 2011, 6) Ivanov, M.A., J.W. Head, PSS, 84, 66, 2013a, 7) Ivanov, M.A., J.W. Head, LPSC-44, #1126, 2013b, 8) Grimm, R.E. Icarus, 112, 89, 1994, 9) Sjogren W. L., et al., JGR, 88, 1119, 1983, 10) Smrekar, S.E., R.J. Phillips, EPSL, 107, 582, 1991, 11) Simons, M., et al., Science, 264, 798, 1994, 12) Simons, M., et al., GJI, 131, 24, 1997, 3) Ivanov, M.A., J.W. Head, JGR., 109., NE10001, 2004, 14) Stofan, E. R., et al., GSAB 101, 143, 1989, 15) Smrekar, S.E., et al., in: Venus II, 845, 1997, 16) Esposito, P.B., et al., Icarus, 51, 448, 1982, 17) Senske, D.A., et al., JGR, 97, 13395, 1992, 18) Ivanov, M.A., A.T. Basilevsky, GRL, 20, 2579, 1993, 19) Basilevsky, A.T., et al., GRL, 26, 2593, 1999, 20) Brown, C.D., R.E. Grimm, Icarus, 139, 40, 1999. Fig. 3. Evolution of long-wavelength topography of Venus. 