1126.PDF
IMPACT CRATER MORPHOLOGY OF THE MOON:  EASTERN  NEARSIDE (45S - 45N, 0-90E).  M. D. Ramos1 and N. G. Barlow2, 1Dept. Geological Sciences & Engineering, University of Nevada, Reno, marlon_ramos@zoho.com, 2 Dept. Physics and Astronomy, Northern Arizona University, NAU Box 6010, Flagstaff, AZ 86011-6010, Nadine.Barlow@nau.edu.  Introduction: The Moon is a standard of comparison for rates and styles of impact cratering in our Solar System. Its surface preserves cratering events that span both ancient highland and younger maria terrains. This study utilized Lunar Reconnaisssance Orbiter (LRO) data to investigate the characteristics and distributions of central peak, wall terracing, flat and fractured floor, central pit, multi-ring, floor deposits, nested, and ejecta blanket crater morphologies within the eastern hemisphere of the lunar nearside (45˚S-45˚N, 0˚-90˚E). Craters in this study were cataloged according to location, geologic unit, presence or absence of an ejecta blanket, and presence of interior morphologies. Morphologies were then correlated with each other, crater diameter, and primary geologic unit (i.e. anorthositic highlands versus basaltic maria). We also investigated the simple-to-complex transition diameter as a function of geologic unit. Our preliminary results suggest that the standard morphometric relationships [1] may require revision in light of the new LRO data.  Regional Morphologic Characteristics: We utilized LRO Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) imagery to classify interior and ejecta morphologies for 4404 craters  5-km-diameter within the study region. Crater diameters and locations were recorded using crater analysis tools within the JMARS Moon application. LRO Wide Angle Camera (WAC) imagery was used to delineate boundaries between highlands and mare units. Data were uploaded into ArcGIS and maps were produced showing the distribution of the different morhpologies. Our analysis shows that wall terrace, central peak, and central pit morphologies more commonly form in large, highland craters. Central Peaks: Figure 1 shows the distribution of central peak craters within the study region. We find that central peaks preferentially form in highlands craters, even with the lower frequency of large craters within the maria,. We identified 76 craters with central peaks, 62 in the highlands and 14 in the maria. Craters containing central peaks ranged in diameter from 13.8 km to 193.4 km in the highlands versus 24.4 km to 144.5 km in the maria.  Wall Terracing: Craters containing wall terraces are more common in the highlands. Of the 28 total craters with this morphology, 21 were located in highlands and 7 were within mare terrain. However, we began to see wall terraces form in craters with diameters at around 43 km for both geologic units. Many terrace structures showed a significant degree of slumping due to wall failure during the modification stage of crater formation [2, 3].     Flat and Fractured Floors: Flat-floored craters show a random distribution in both the highlands and maria regions. Although this is a morphology commonly associated with large craters, a number of smaller craters also possessed a flat floored profile. Fracturing of the crater floor was prominent around the maria perimeter, along the outer edges of  multi-ring basins. Such fractures are usually formed through isostatic adjustment or upwelling of subsurface magma. 162 craters within the highlands contained floor fractures versus 139 maria craters.  Ejecta Blankets: Ejecta blankets are common around smaller, simple craters, consistent with fresher craters commonly being the smaller ones. While there are more simple craters found on highlands terrain, the flat, smooth nature of the maria made it easier to distinguish the characteristic ejecta blanket patterns. This study found 109 craters possessing primary ejecta: 59 in the mare and 50 in the highlands.  Floor Deposits: Floor deposits are a ubiquitous morphology in the craters studied. Crater floor deposits are typically from ejecta deposits, both from the initial impact and from subsequent crater formation, and slope failure of the crater wall as a result of mass wasting. The general style of deposits can provide insight into the layering of  target material. Many craters with floor deposits exhibit a central mound morphology, consistent with excavation through an overlying regoFig. 1: Regional distribution of central peak morphologies for the study area.  1126.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
lith layer where the crater diameter to regolith thickness ratio lies between 4.0 and 7.5 [3]. Central Pit and Central Peak Correlations: Nine central pit craters were identified within the study region. These craters preferentially form in the highlands (Fig. 2). LOLA topography assisted in defining these central pits because they were often difficult to visibly distinguish because of crater degradation. Of these nine central pits, five are found atop central peaks. Central pits are common on Mars, Ganymede, and Callisto and have been attributed to melting and drainage of subsurface ice during crater formation [4-6]. Because the Moon is a volatile-poor body [7], a different formation mechanism is suggested. A possible model of lunar central pit formation proposes that highly brecciated material within the central peak is susceptible to heightened mechanical collapase [8].    . Simple to Complex Crater Transition:  The transition between lunar simple and complex craters occurs at a larger diameter than on Earth due to the Moon’s weaker gravitational field. Complex craters are distinguished by the presence of features such as wall terraces and central peaks. We separated craters by geologic region (highlands and maria) and further divided them into craters that possessed no morphology and those that had central peaks. These were binned in 5-km-D intervals to constrain the transition size (DSC). Our results reveal that the presence of central peaks in highlands craters begins at about 13.8-km-diameter, but central peaks do not begin to dominate until craters reach about 25-km-diameter (Fig. 3). A similar analysis for mare craters finds no central peaks in craters smaller than 24.4 km. Pike [1] noted that DSC varies depending on the criteria used (i.e., depth-to-diameter ratio versus presence of central peaks or wall terraces) and suggested a transition diameter range of 15-20 km. Analysis of DSC in the northwestern region of the Moon based on depth/diameter analysis suggests a much smaller transition diameter (around 10-15 km diameter) [9]. Thus more analysis is needed using a variety of techniques to better determine if the commonly-accepted transition diameter needs revision. What is surprising is that there is no statistical difference in DSC between highlands and maria terrains.     Discussion: This study reveals some distinct correlations among crater size, geologic distribution, and morphology in the eastern hemisphere of  the lunar near side. Further analysis is needed to determine if these trends are representative across the entire lunar surface. Correlations between central peak and pit morphologies are plausibly explained by a simple collapse model given the Moon’s lack of subsurface volatiles. Analysis of the presence of central peaks suggests a higher DSC than that obtained by depth-diameter analysis elsewhere on the Moon, but both techniques suggest there is no statistical difference in transition diameter between highlands and mare material.  Acknowledgements: MDR was supported by the NAU NSF REU program (AST-1004107). NGB was supported by NASA LASER award NNX08BA02G. References: [1] Pike R.J. (1980) Proc. LPSC 11, 2159-2189. [2] Schultz P.H. (1979) Moon Morphology,U. TX Press. [3] Melosh, H.J. (1989) Impact Cratering: A Geologic Process, Oxford Univ. Press, 8284. [4] Barlow N.G. (2010) GSA SP 465, 15-27. [5] Alzate N. and Barlow N.G. (2011) Icarus, 211, 1741283. [6] Elder C.M. et al. (2012) Icarus, 221, 831843. [7] Jaumann, R. et al. (2012) Planet. & Space Sci., 74, 15-22. [8] Croft S.M. (1981) LPS XII, 196198. [9] Kinser R.M. et al. (2012) LPS XLIV, Abstract #1679. Fig. 2: Regional distribution of central pit morphologies for the study area. Fig. 3: Diameters of highlands craters with and without central peaks  1126.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
