 A SPECTACULAR NEW GEORGIA TEKTITE FROM DOOLY COUNTY, GEORGIA.  H. Povenmire1 Florida Institute of Technology, 1845 Charlesmonte Dr., #E, Indialantic, FL 32903, katiehal1@yahoo.com.    Since 1970, there has been a determined effort to map out the Georgia tektite strewn field.  The current theory is that the tektites are eroding out of the southern edge of the Piedmont Plateau onto the Georgia Coastal Plains from Augusta SW to Columbus, Georgia. This trend happends to fall very near the Fall Line. In 2006, veteran tektite hunter Robert Strange found a small, 4.26 gm tektite in extreme eastern Dooly County.  In spite of many hours of field work, no other tektites have been found in Dooly County.  This new specimen is disk shaped, weighs 17.6 gms and has the approximate dimensions of 34 x 11mm.  It is in excellent condition except for one small, fresh chip from the rim and has no obvious bubbles or inclusions.  The general find location is approximately 2.5 miles east of  Vienna, Georgia.  This tektite has particular importance since it is only the second tektite found west of I-75 and represents one of  the western most, well documented tektites found in the strewn field.  This new specimen extends the strewn field westward by approximately 5 miles.  Dooly County has 330 square miles.  The Georgia-area tektite strewn field now covers approximately 24 counties and two in western South Carolina.  The total estimated number of Georgia tektites found is approximatley 2900.  The total area of the Georgia area strewn field is approximately 11,300 square miles.  This additional area now makes the Georgia area strewn field about 20 percent larger than the Texas Bediasite strewn field.  There are approximately 10 other counties which have the correct geological conditions and while some have been searched, none have been found so far.  These are Ben Hill, Peach, Coffee, Burke, Bulloch, Candler, Worth, Irwin, Crisp and Sumter Counties. The revised age of the Georgia tektites is now 35.5 my. Some unrelated tektite news is that there have been a number of expeditions to the new Central American Tektite strewn field.  These have greatly expanded the known area.  There have also been finds of teardrops, dumbbells, disks and other splash forms.  The two largest tektites are 43 and 42 gms.  Two dumbbells have been found.  One is  small and about 6 gms, the other is 17.3gms, and 2.5 inches long.  There are probably slightly more than 500 specimens found but most are small and not showing much recognizable splash form.  [1] Povenmire, H. (2013) Tektites-A Cosmic Mystery   Blue Note Publishing, Melbourne, FL [2] Povenmire, H. and Strange, R.L, (2006) The First Tektites from Dooly and Crisp Counties Georgia  LPSC March 2006 (abstract) Houston, TX.  