 CO2 ICE COMPOSITION AND EVOLUTION ON MARS : A RADIATIVE TRANSFER INVERSION. F.  Andrieu1,2, F. Schmidt1,2 and S. Douté3,  1Université Paris Sud, Laboratoire IDES, UMR8148, Orsay, F-91405, France, 2CNRS,  Orsay,  F-91405,  France  (francois.andrieu@u-psud.fr,  frederic.schmidt@u-psud.fr),  3Institut  de  Planétologie  et d'Astrophysique de Grenoble, CNRS-Université Joseph Fourier, France. Introduction:  The  CO2 cycle  on  Mars  [1]  is  the predominant climatic factor on the red planet. It consists in the condensation of a part of the atmosphere into seasonal CO2 ice caps during the polar night, and its sublimation during spring. This cycle triggers various seasonal surface processes,  such as  cold  gas  jets  and  flows  [2].  CO2 ice acting  as  a  cold  trap  for  water,  this  cycle  has  also  an impact  on  the  water  cycle  on  Mars  [3].  The characterization  of  these  seasonal  deposits  and  their evolution  appears  as  a  key  to  constrain  the  exchanges between  the  surface  and  the  atmosphere,  the  seasonal processes and in general the Martian climate. We propose a radiative  transfer  inversion  to  retrieve  quantitatively  the surface state (composition, grain size, compacity, surface roughness…). This method is based on the construction of a synthetic spectral database, and the comparison of actual CRISM hyperspectral data with it. Method : CRISM dataset. The inversion method presented can be used with any hyperspectral instrument. We chose CRISM on board MRO [4], for its spatial resolution, and targeted observations,  and  because  it  takes  measurements  of  the same  place  always  at  the  same  local  solar  time.  That allows to follow the evolution of  the surface during the season, without taking into account daily variations. The data is corrected from the atmospheric contributions (gas and aerosols) [5], using pressure prediction for gases [6] and aerosols optical thickness estimations from M. J. Wolff [7].  We  used  for  the  inversion  the   247 CRISM wavelengths within the range 1 µm - 2,6 µm. Direct  model:  synthetic  spectral  database.  The  first step is to sample the parameters space. The direct model is an  analytic  multi-layer  radiative  transfer  model  [8].  We consider a contaminated CO2 ice slab over the regolith (see on Figure 1). The parameters  to  be  sampled are:  the thickness of the slab, the proportion and grain size of water ice and the proportion of Martian dust in intimate mix in the slab. We use for water and CO2 the optical constants estimated  by  B.  Schmitt  and  S.  Douté  [8],  and  we determined for the dust a couple of grain size and optical constants that is consistent with the orbital data, using a Monte Carlo method based on Shkuratov model [9]. The direct  model  computes  high  resolution  spectra,  that  are then  down  sampled  to  the  resolution  of  CRISM instrument, using its spectral PSF [4]. We also added the possibility of a linear mixing within a pixel between the contaminated  slab  described  above  and  optically  thick dust.  This  mix  describes  the  possibility  of  a  granular deposit  at  the  surface  as  well  as  a  pixel  composed  of patches of ice over the regolith. Figure 1 : Description of the surface model. A slab of CO2 ice, contaminated with water ice and dust grains upon the regolith. The free parameters are: the slab thickness, water ice content and grain size, and dust content. Inversion. The inversion consists in the comparison of a  measure  to  the  whole  database,  using  a  likelihood function L described as : where dsim and dmes are respectively synthetic and measured spectra, and  C  is a  nb×nb  covariance matrix,  nb being the number of spectral bands used. C is the covariance matrix of  the  measured  spectra  we  expect.   In  the  bayesian framework under gaussian hypothesis, it shall represent the state of uncertainty of the data [10]. C will traduce (i) the uncertainties  of  the  measure  itself  (noise),  (ii)  the uncertainties we expect from the atmospheric corrections (aerosols optical thickness...), and (iii) the uncertainties in the estimation of the geometry (incidence and emergence), due  to  local  topography.   The  interest  of  using  such  a matrix instead of a much easier least squares method, is that  the  evaluation  of  the  likelihood  of  a  simulation  is determined with a physical criterion, and uncertainties on each parameters are estimated. Results: We used this method to follow the evolution of the same CRISM pixel throughout the local spring, until the total sublimation of the seasonal ice layer (see Figure 2).  This pixel  is  located in Richardson crater dune field (72,0085°S/179,4218°E).  The  preliminary  results  show good agreement of our look up table with the data.  The    figure 2 shows the CO2 slab thickness as a function of time for the said pixel. It is decreasing as expected from general sublimation  of  the  seasonal  cap.  The  Mars  Climate Database [6] gives results of the same order of magnitude but always larger. That could be due to a local effect of slope. The results on the slab contents in impurities,  the water ice grain size and the linear mixing at the surface with optically thick dust are also consistent,  and will be discussed.  Nevertheless,  we  cannot  retrieve  the  slab content  in  dust,  its  manifestation being too close  to  the atmospheric aerosols effect.  Figure 2 : Preliminary result showing the evolution of the slab  thickness  throughout  the  local  spring  during  the Martian year 28. The levels of green represent in log scale the  likelihood  of  the  parameter  value  for  a  given observation, the maximum being marked with a circled red cross. Discussion and conclusion: This study shows that our method  is  able  to  retrieve  quantitatively  most  of  the characteristics  of  the  icy  surface  with  reasonable uncertainties.  The CRISM data  used for  these  inversion has been corrected in gas and aerosols using M. J. Wolff estimations for the aerosols optical thickness [5]. It seems that  the  atmospheric  aerosols  optical  thickness  is sometimes  overestimated  in  our  cases,  resulting  in  a overcorrection of the spectra. The high uncertainty on the dust content in the slab could be improved using a more precise method of atmospheric correction. Besides, as the geometry  of  the  illumination  and  the  measure  has  an important  impact on the spectrum, it  is  important  to get information on the local topography. For a large number of inversions, it is necessary to have digital terrain models. References :  [1] R.  B.  Leighton  and  B.  C.  Murray,  "Behavior  of carbon dioxide and other volatiles on mars," Science, vol. 153, pp. 136-144, July 1966. [2] H. H. Kieffer et al.,  CO2 jets formed by sublimation beneath translucent slab ice in Mars'  seasonal  south  polar  ice  cap  Nature,  2006,  442, 793-796.  [3] K.  L.  Wagstaff  et  al.,  Observations  of  the north polar water ice annulus on Mars using THEMIS and TES Planetary and Space Science, Mars Polar Processes: Atmosphere-Surface  Interactions,  2008,  56,  256-265  [4] Murchie  et  al., Compact  Reconnaissance  Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter  (MRO)  J.  Geophys.  Res.,  AGU,  2007,  112, E05S03-. [5] Douté, S.; Deforas, E.; Schmidt, F.; Oliva, R. & Schmitt,  B. A Comprehensive Numerical  Package for the Modeling of  Mars  Hyperspectral  Images  Lunar and Planetary Institute Conference Abstracts, 2007, 38, 1836-. [6] S.  Lewis  et  al.,   A climate database for  Mars,  J.  of Geophys Res: Planets,  1999, 104, 24177-24194 [7] M. J. Wolff et al., Wavelength dependence of dust aerosol single scattering  albedo  as  observed  by  the  Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer,  J. Geophys. Res., AGU,  2009, 114, E00D04-.  [8] S. Douté and B. Schmitt, "A  multilayer  bidirectional  reflectance  model  for  the analysis  of  planetary  surface  hyperspectral  images  at visible and near-infrared wavelengths," J. Geophys. Res., vol.  103,  no.  E13,  pp.  31367-31389,  1998. [9]  Y. Shkuratov et al., A Model of Spectral Albedo of Particulate Surfaces : Implications for Optical Properties of the Moon, Icarus,  1999,  137,  235-246.  [10] Mosegaard,  K.  & Tarantola, A. Monte Carlo sampling of solutions to inverse problems J. Geophys. Res., AGU, 1995, 100, 12431-12447. 