1167.PDF
PLANETARY LAKE LANDER: YEAR 3 SCIENCE OVERVIEW. N. A. Cabrol1,2, T. M. Smith3, E. A. Grin1,2, S. Lee3, R. Lorenz4, J. Moersch5, E. MacLennan5, V. Parro6, L. Pedersen3, E. W. Smith7, P. Sobron1, C. Tambley8, C. Thompson9, D. S. Wettergreen10. 1SETI Institute Carl Sagan Center, 189 Bernardo Ave., Suite 100, Mountain View, CA 94043; 2NASA Ames Space Science Division, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035. Email: Nathalie.A.Cabrol@nasa.gov; 3NASA Ames Intelligent Robotics Group; 4Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab., MD, 20723-6099; 5University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996; 6Centro de Astrobiología, Madrid, Spain; 7Aqua Survey Inc., Flemington, NJ 08822; 8Campoalto Operaciones, Santiago, Chile; 9University of Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada; 10Carnegie Mellon University Robotics Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, 15260.  Introduction:  As planetary exploration expands robotics presence deeper into the Solar System, distances make communications and interaction between robots and ground operation teams increasingly complex. Adaptive science and systems are now allowing the design of intelligent robots which, in the near future, will be aware of the planetary environments they explore, and learn as they go. This new generation of robots will be able to accumulate knowledge, understand mission priorities, and the concepts of nominal and off-nominal environmental conditions. They will make and evaluate in situ observations as events happen, and not only when receiving commands from the Earth. PLL is a first step towards planetary robot awareness and decision-making without constant human oversight, which is applied here to the concept of adaptive exploration of the lakes and seas of Titan. Background and Objectives: For its third year field campaign, the PLL project [1, 2] deployed a lake lander at Laguna Negra (33o37’25”/70o03’35W) in the Central Andes of Chile between November 26 and December 19, 2013. Laguna Negra is located at 2,700 m elevation in the region of the Echaurren glacier.  The overarching goal of the project is to develop and field test operational scenarios and systems relevant to future missions to the lakes and seas of Titan. The robotic lake lander carries a science payload comparable to that of the Titan Mare Explorer (TiME) mission project [3]. During the first two field campaigns (2011-2012), the team generated an environmental database in order to baseline the adaptive system that was used in 2013 by the lake lander to initiate autonomous exploration traverses of the lake, and the detection of high priority sampling areas. Traverses and detection were supported by aerial visible and TIR coverage that simulated descent imagery allowed comparison between observed surface water temperatures and those measured by the robot. (For the details of the 2013 technology goals and results, see [4]). Adaptive sampling capabilities will ultimately allow planetary lake landers to make decisions on their own about the nature of changes they observe on Titan’s lakes and seas (e.g., temperature, turbidity, organics), and to decide what sampling templates and data rates to utilize to document these changes.  A scale model of the TiME capsule was also used to test wave response and drift dynamics, and to explore the effect of wave diffraction and other difficultto-model real-world factors that affect drift of liferafts and icebergs on Earth, and how fast TiME may sail across Titan's seas. Science Activities and Results: In addition to these technology demonstrations, a primary science goal of the Year 3 field campaign included to characterize how much of the complexity of a lake habitat, and organics content and distribution could be inferred when using either a robotic lake lander to sample the subsurface or a high resolution investigation of the water column. Documenting this question required an integrated survey of Laguna Negra, which revealed a unique ecosystem in an exceptionally transparent lake. Bathymetry. The bathymetric survey gave the physical envelop to model the lake habitat, showing a 6 km long and 1.7 km wide lake. Sonar sounding revealed a 276-m deep body of water, whose topography reflects past carving by two merging glacial valleys, and local tectonic deformation in the basement rock and sediment. Sonar pings were collected at regular time intervals and speed from a motorized boat. Some of these traverses were performed a first time in Year 2 on a drifting boat to simulate a lake lander on Titan with no propulsion, in which case, map resolution, surface coverage, and information depended on wind velocity and currents.  Temperature and Light Distribution. Lake temperature was monitored over a period of two years by the lake lander profiler while at its mooring position near the main influx of glacier meltwater at the Victoria’s cascade. Monitoring characterized the lake stratified thermal structure down to 40-m depth, the thermocline depth evolution with season, and the lake overturn at the beginning of austral winter (Fig. 1). It also highlighted the role played by the melting season and discharge fluctuations in the physicochemical characteristics and distribution of organics. In addition to the lake lander data, three lines of water temperature and light sensors were deployed down to 50 m depth. They were spaced increasingly farther away from the mooring site in the south and 1167.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
east regions of the lake. Progressive equalization of temperature with depth occured over time, culminating with lake overturn. Very little variation was observed over the year below the thermocline, temperature varying between 4.3 and 6oC with declining amplitude as the lake overturned.  Fig.	  1.	  Top	  to	  bottom	  :	  Austral	  summer	  to	  winter	  evolu-­‐tion	   of	   water	   temperature,	   dissolved	   oxygen,	   and	   chloro-­‐phyll.	   The	   thermocline	   depth	   varies	   from	   ~15	   m	   to	   35	   m	  before	  the	  lake	  overturns.   Water Column Exploration: Life Distribution, Water Chemistry, & Organics. High altitude and UV radiation combine with exceptional water transparency and deep penetration of biologically-damaging UV to create an extreme environment for life. Near the surface, macrophytes appear limited to a narrow shelf along the shore. However, passed the penetration depth of UVB, video exploration of the water column revealed an abundance of large algae and plants blanketing the bottom sediment and rocks, some colonizing down to 70 m depth (Fig. 2). Beyond PAR penetration, and down to 270 m, an uninterrupted organics “rain” as well as zooplankton were captured in the lights of the camera. Laser Raman Spectroscopy (LRS) was used to characterize the organic content of the lake through real-time, in-situ LRS analyses, and through ex-situ laboratory analyses of returned samples using benchtop LRS instrumentation. Organic pigments such as carotenoids and long chain unsaturated fatty acids (namely triglycerids) were identified, and their relative abundance calculated along the lake lander traverse [4], and at various depths [5]. Finally, a prototype of an optrode-based real-time chemical sensor was used to characterize the distribution of calcium, potassium, nitrate, and to measure Na+ activity in the water. HLPC is used in the lab. to validate water chemistry measurements.   Fig.	   2.	  70	  m	  depth	  panorama	  with	   substantial	   light	   still	  penetrating	  the	  water	  column	  and	  isolated	  plants	  (right).  Here, we will focus on the significance of our results for the development of lake and sea exploration strategies for Titan. We will also show what Laguna Negra’s ecosystem can teach us about organics and life in deep, permanently dark ecosystems.  References: [1] N. A. Cabrol et al., (2012) AGU Fall Meeting, # 1477317, P024; [2] L. Pedersen et al., (2012) IEEE Conf Proc.; [3] Stofan, E., R. Lorenz, J. Lunine, et al., (2013), TiME - The Titan Mare Explorer, IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, #2434; [4] T. M. Smith et al., (2014), this LPSC; [5] P. Sobron et al., (2014), this LPSC;  Acknowledgments:  The PLL project is funded by the NASA Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets (ASTEP) program under grant # 10ASTEP10-0011. The project team thanks the Aguas Andinas company in Santiago, Chile, for providing access to Laguna Negra. 1167.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
