1179.PDF
GRAIN-SCALE THERMOELASTIC STRESSES ON AIRLESS BODIES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR ROCK BREAKDOWN.  J. L. Molaro and S. Byrne, University of Arizona (jmolaro@lpl.arizona.edu).   Introduction: Thermal stress weathering is the mechanical breakdown of rock from expansion and contraction caused by changes in temperature. Microcracks may form or propagate due to temperature gradients set up by a thermal cycle or shock [1, 2]. This process may play an important role in the evolution of airless landscapes by contributing to regolith production and crater degradation [3, 4, 5].  Traditionally the effectiveness of this process has been assessed by rates of surface temperature change, with a threshold of 2K/min required for permanent damage [6, 7, 4]. Rock surfaces on bodies that lack atmospheres experience dramatic temperature changes that may induce high thermoelastic stresses in the near sub-surface. The thermoelastic behavior of each surface is primarily controlled by its distance to the sun and its solar day length, providing a unique experience on each body [3]. For example, slowly rotating bodies that are close to the sun (such as Mercury) experience a wide diurnal temperature range. Bodies further from the sun (such as asteroids) have a much smaller range, but rotate quickly and experience rapid temperature “shocks” during sunrise/set.  While many studies suggest stresses induced by these temperature changes may cause rock breakdown, the extent of the damage produced as a result is unknown. Here we link surface temperatures and temperature gradients to actual stresses near rock surfaces in order to better judge the efficacy of thermal weathering on different planets. Model: In this study, we modeled grain-scale thermoelastic stresses produced on airless surfaces using Finite Element Analysis of Microstructures (OOF2) [8]. OOF2 is a 2-D finite-element modeling program developed at NIST and designed to help scientists simulate the behavior of microstructures. We   Figure 1. Simple microstructure used for OOF2 modeling. Each hexagon in the structure represents a mineral grain with unique material properties. The black and white hexagons represent grains of different materials. used OOF2 to model the thermal behavior of microstructures with varying grain sizes and thermophysical properties, and to explore the relationship between the induced spatial and temporal temperature gradients and stress.  Using OOF2, we imposed the solar and conductive fluxes calculated by a simple 1-D thermal model at the surface and at 5 mm depth on a microstructure. The microstructure (Figure 1) has bulk properties typical of a basalt, and a grain size of ~0.3 mm. We assigned 25% and 75% of the grains a thermal conductivity of 1 and 3 W/mK, respectively. The heat and displacement equations are solved over a solar day on a Lunar equatorial surface.  The stress parameter presented in these results is the equivalent stress, or von Mises stress. This parameter is calculated from the principal stresses, and is commonly used in materials science studies. A material is said to fail when the equivalent stress reaches some critical yield strength of the material. While this parameter is always positive, a sign correction has been applied to the data (Figure 2, 3) to visually separate tensile and compressional states. Since tensile strengths are much lower, it is tensile stresses that have the highest potential for contributing to rock breakdown.  Preliminary Conclusions: Preliminary results indicate that flat, equatorial, Lunar surfaces experience diurnal maximum effective stresses of 529 MPa while   Figure 2. Profile of the equivalent stress at the surface of the microstructure over one solar day. The red dotted lines indicate typical rock strengths in both tensional and compressional regimes. The maximum tensile stress experienced on the surface of this microstructure was 529 MPa. 1179.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 3. Snapshot of the stress over the entire microstructure at the time of peak tension. Stresses are concentrated at the tips of the pore spaces, leading to a peak tensile stress of 2 GPa.  under tension (Figure 2). Typical tensile strengths of rocks are on the order of 100 MPa, suggesting that thermo-mechanical fracturing may be possible on the Moon. When a pore space is introduced into the microstructure to simulate the effect of a pre-existing microcrack, the stresses induced during the day become concentrated at their tips. This stress concentration results in a maximum tensile stress of 2 GPa in this microstructure (Figure 3), which is an order of magnitude larger than typical rock strengths. The same experiment can also be performed for other solar system surfaces such as Vesta. Using a microstructure that is 0.5 mm in depth, with a grain size of 0.03 mm, the maximum tensile stress induced on an equatorial Vestian surface is 19 and 68 MPa, for undamaged and porous microstructures, respectively. Both of these values are somewhat lower than typical rock strengths, indicating thermal stress weathering may be less effective on Vesta. It should be noted, however, that due to Vesta’s rapid rotation rate, the model domain (and thus grain size) is smaller than for Lunar cases. The effect of grain size on stress remains to be tested. Preliminary model results indicate that thermoelastic stresses induced on Lunar surfaces are likely high enough to cause rock breakdown. Stresses induced on Vestian surfaces, however, were much lower. Further work is needed to determine how effective this process is on each body, and how much damage may occur as a result.  We will present model results of thermoelastic stresses induced on a variety of microstructures with varying grain properties and distributions, in a variety of solar system locations. This works represents the first step in quantifying the contribution of thermal stress weathering to regolith production rates on these bodies.  References: [1] Siegesmund S. et al. (2008) Environmental Geology, 56, 473–494. [2] Lu T. J. and Fleck N. A. (1998) Acta Materialia, 46, 4744–68. [3] Molaro J. L. and Byrne S. (2012) JGR, 117, E10011. [4] Viles H. et al. (2010) Geoph. Res. Letters, 37, L18201. [5] Dombard A. J. et al. (2010) Icarus, 210, 713-721. [6] Richter D. and Simmons G. (1974) Int. Jr. of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sci., 11, 403-411. [7] Hall K. and Andre M. F. (2001) Geomorphology, 41, 23-35. [8] Langer et al. (2001) Computing in Sci. & Eng., 3, 15-23.    1179.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
