 SUBSURFACE LIFE IN THE ATACAMA: OVERVIEW OF THE FIRST AUTONOMOUS TRAVERSE OF A 1-M ROVER-MOUNTED DRILL. N. A. Cabrol1,2, D. S. Wettergreen3, K. Warren Rhodes2; E. A. Grin1,2; T. Hare4; J. Wei5; J. Lambert6; J. Moersch7; S. Pointing8; K. Tanaka4; C. Tate7; D. R. Thompson6; M. Wagner3; A. Wang5; K. Zacny9. 1SETI Institute Carl Sagan Center, 189 Bernardo Ave., Suite 100, Mountain View, CA 94043; 2NASA Ames Space Science Division, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035. Email: Nathalie.A.Cabrol@nasa.gov; 3Carnegie Mellon University Robotics Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890; 4US Geological Survey, Flagstaff, 2255 N. Gemini Dr. Flagstaff, AZ 86001; 5Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences  Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130-4899; 6Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA, 91109; 7The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996; 8Institute for Applied Ecology, Auckland University of Technology, New Zealand; 9 Honeybee Robotics, Pasadena, CA 91103.  Introduction:  The Life in the Atacama (LiTA) project is developing and field testing a 1-m drill mounted on an autonomous rover. The rover carries science instruments relevant to the study of subsurface microbial life in the Atacama as well as to the Mars 2020 mission [1]. The 1-m drilling capacity (Fig. 1) provides intermediate subsurface access between ExoMars and Mars 2020 [2, 3], and is proving the capability for autonomous drilling. The highly mobile rover can travel kilometer distances and then access the subsurface to apply instruments to recovered samples. A central component to this approach is rover decision-making without human supervision in the selection of potential science targets of opportunity. Such strategy increases both the number of sites visited and science productivity, and the odds of finding favorable environments for extinct and/or extant life.  Fig.	  1	  -­	  	  One-­-meter	  	  drill	  and	  sampling	  system.	  The hyperarid environment of the Atacama gives the opportunity to address questions of critical significance about boundary conditions and factors governing microbial life's presence, distribution, and adaptation relevant to the search for life on Mars. In the process, our analog mission is helping to document poorlyknown subsurface ecosystems that have adapted to early Mars analog conditions, including increased aridity, oxidation, salinity, and the formation of perchlorates [4]. It also enables to quantify their indidivual and combined role in subsurface habitability. Project Objectives: In May 2013, scientists and mission planners at distributed institutions in the US remotely operated the rover Zöe in the Atacama. Operations were driven by science and technology objectives, including to:  - Search for, and characterize, past and present microbial life and habitats through large-area, autonomous rover traverses between the Pacific Coast and the Andes, and perform subsurface sampling in an environment presenting analogy to early Mars; - Characterize and quantify the performance of the rover, drill, and instrument system on a variety of geologic terrains, and the nature of sample contamination associated with repeated drilling for subsurface exploration; and - Identify and optimize science exploration strategies, and validate technologies that maximize productivity in Mars survey missions. Analog Mission Elements: The LITA drill is a third generation, ~300 Watt, rotary-percussive drilling system designed to capture drilled cuttings from depths to approximately 1 m depth [2, 5]. The sampling system uses a 'bite' approach, whereby a drill repeatedly penetrates in 10 cm intervals, captures the sample on the deep flutes, and deposits the sample in 1 cc cups within the 20-cup carousel. The 'bite' sampling allows preservation of stratigraphy while the capture of cuttings, as opposed to a core, substantially reduces system complexity. Drilling and sample delivery are fully autonomous.   The science payload for the 2013 field campaignconsisted in: a high resolution (0.3 milliradian/pixel) stereo panoramic imager for investigating mega- to mesoscale geology, morphology, and topography; a Visible/Near Infrared (VNIR) spectrometer (350-2500 nm with 10 nm spectral resolution). The rover was capable of autonomously calibrating the VNIR and directing it at predefined features of interest (e.g., bedrock) when finding these features in navigation imagery. The science team planned autonomous spectrometer targeting maneuvers using two different commands: "Target Checks" seek isolated targets of  opportunity during long traverses, while "Paired Panorama" commands augment a larger panorama with directed measurements of the most informative spectral features.  Sample analysis instruments included a Mars Microbeam Raman spectrometer for close-up mineralogical analysis of rocks and soils, and the detection and characterization of water, and organic and inorganic forms of carbon. A Bio-UV Fluorescence (BUF) imager was used to distinguish biogenic species from inorganic materials [6]. Environmental sensors gave data for air temperature, pressure, RH condensing moisture, wind speed and direction; and subsurface loggers for soil temperature, pH, and redox. A pyranometer monitored UV along the traverse, while other atmospheric data were provided by satellites. Visible and SWIR satellite imagery supported geological, morphological, stratigraphical interpretation, mineral identification, and traverse planning. Results Summary: During the 10 days of science operations, the rover autonomously covered a ~50-km traverse. Remote science planning of one to multi-day activities was executed via Google Earth, with additional guidance from ASTER IR multispectral imagery, and rover data was uplinked daily from the field.  The VNIR system was activated 16 times during the traverse. The onboard feature detection was deemed accurate in all cases. The automated followup pointing based on these detections yielded interpretable spectra in 11 of 16 cases. The autonomous navigation function was activated twice. These runs were thwarted by satellite map misregistration and poor endof-day lighting, respectively. However, post-analysis reveals that the system was functioning nominally, and gave correct output for the data provided.  The science autonomy system made separate decisions on scales of 10s or 100s meters. When performing adaptive navigation, the rover analyzed satellite data and an onboard spectral library to adjust its traverse. To select its next navigation waypoint, the rover performed an unmixing of the satellite image using spectra from its library, and adjusted its path to favor regions that were poorly explained by the current VNIR spectral library. This had the effect of collecting diverse endmember spectra, and caused it to visit spectrally distinctive units during long traverses. Operators used end-of-traverse goal points, time budgets, and "keepout zones" to direct the rover's decisions. In adition to the autonomous VNIR system, 17 locales were investigated (drilled and measured by the science payload). The rover traversed terrains of diverse textures and trafficability, from unconsolidated alluvial fan to playa materials. The drill demonstrated fully autonomous sample capture and delivery operations. This included drilling to a target depth, sample capture, sample transfer to a target cup, leveling of a sample within the cup, and positioning of a cup underneath one of the two carousel mounted instruments. Sample capture was achieved every time in cohesive, fine grained soils. In coarse, highly porous soils containing many pebbles, the sampling effectiveness was poor. To achieve higher sampling efficiency in these materials,  the sampling auger has been redesigned to include larger diameter and lower pitch flutes. Despite the rover's 50 km traverse on rough terrain and wide diurnal temperature cycles, MMRS did not show noticeable performance changes. Multi-point Raman spectra were obtained for 31 drill and pit samples collected at depths from 0 to 80 cm. Field spectra were compared with those acquired by a commercial Raman spectrometer in lab. The spectra were consistent, and unambiguously identified three sulfates (gypsum, natural anhydrite and γ-CaSO4), calcite, feldspars, quartz and anatase. The presence of γ-CaSO4 is explained by low temperature dehydration of gypsum in the hyper-arid desert. The four main minerals observed show different depth distributions: anhydrite prefers deep locations; feldspars the surface; and gypsum and quartz did not have clear preferences.  A comparison between soil recovered from the drill and parallel samples obtained by manual coring is ongoing to allow an estimate of drill efficacy in microbial signature recovery. Results will be presented at the conference, including: microbiological diversityabundance assessments using rRNA genes; Real-time quantitative PCR to estimate microbial abundance [7]; High-throughput sequencing to assess biodiversity [8]; Phylogenetic analysis to establish evolutionary relationships and biogeographic patterns [9]; and multivariate analyses to determine the abiotic drivers of community assembly [10].   References: [1] J. Mustard et al., (2013), Report of the Mars 2020 Science Definition Team, 154 pp. (MEPAG); [2] Zacny K. et al., (2013) #1332; [3] P. Magnani et al., (2010), Space Exp. Symp., IAF, Paper # IAC-10-7208; [4] D. C. Catling et al. (2010), JGR, 115, E00E11; [5] K. G. Zacny, et al., Reaching 1 m Deep on Mars: The Icebreaker Drill, Astrobiology, 1166-1198; [6] A. Wang et al., (2012), LPSC; [7] S. B. Pointing et al., (2009), PNAS 106, 19964-19969; [8] A. Woo et al., (2013), Atm. Env. 74, 291-300; [9] J. Bahl et al., (2011), Nature Com. 2, 163; [10] T. Caruso et al., (2011), Nature ISME, J. 5, 1406-1413. Acknowledgments: LiTA is funded by the NASA Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets (ASTEP) program under grant NNX11AJ87G. 