1198.PDF
GULLIES ON MARS: FLUVIAL GEOLOGIC PROCESSES AS EVIDENCE FOR LIQUID WATER ON MARS.  D.J. Hernandez1,2, V. C. Gulick1,3 and C. A.  Narlesky1,4, 1NASA-Ames Research Center, MS 239-20, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA.  2Department of Geologic Sciences, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, CA 91768, USA, djhernandez@csupomona.edu. 3SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA ,virginia.c.gulick@nasa.gov.  4MBK Engineers, Sacramento, CA 95815, USA ,narlesky@mbkengineers.com.  Introduction: The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter HiRISE camera has provided unprecedented highresolution (up to ~25m/px) views of the surface of Mars. These images provide additional  insight into the the more recent geologic activities of Mars. In this study, we used a HiRISE DTM (PSP_006261_1410) to analyze gully morphology and morphometry in Corozal Crater. Gullies are located on X and Y facing slopes. and exhibit morphologic characteristics similar to those of terrestrial gullies formed by fluvial processes including x,y, and z. Using longitudinal and cross-sectional profiles of 12 gullies within Corozal crater, we determined the eroded gully volumes, slopes, and several morphometric indices such as channel concavity, and sinuosity of individual gullies.  Our preliminary finding suggest that sediment from crator walls are transported into gully aprons due to fluvial activity on the subsurface of Mars.  Morphology: Gullies are defined as deep channels that cut through the bed rock and normally eroded by water. These geologic formations serve as drainage ways for water as well as a transport method for sediment.  Gullies eroded into underlying bed rock exhibit fluvial bedform characteristics as seen in terrestrial gully systems [1] .   Steep hills such as valley walls, central peaks and pits, dune fields, and crater walls provide a terrain in which the development of gullies can be studied.  Alcoves are formed with a 20°-25° angeled slope, channels are formed with a 10°-20° slope, and the debris fans normally exhibit an angle of less than 10° slope [4]. Although gullies are more common in the Southern Hemisphere, they are located in both Hemispheres of Mars.  The vast majority of gullies are located between 30° and 50° latitudes in both hemispheres [5].  The gullies are generally located on pole facing slopes, although gullies are also present on some equatorward, western and eastern facing slopes and are  rare in equatorial regions.  Methodology: Many gullies exhibit similar trends in terrestrial examples such as discharge volume, stream concavity index numbers, as well as sinuosity values.  Therefore, many different craters on Mars will be studied using similar methodologies and calculations of alcove, apron, and stream volumes.  Gullies located on different geologic formations, varying locations within the southern and northern hemispheres, as well as research on specific locations throughout different time frames will be studied to find evidence for water as the main source of sediment transport and surface erosion.   Longitudinal profiles through the center stream lines of 12 individual gullies in Corozal Crater were determined using HiRISE stereo images. The center stream line data was then transferred to the the HiRISE DTM using the software package ENVI [6] to accurately extract the elevation and profile of the eroded gulley on the crater wall. Perpendicular transect lines (cross-sections) were then created from the starting position at the terminus of the gully from right to left, working up along the channel, ending at the head of the alcove [4]. Computer scripts were developed to determine the eroded volume of the gully drainages.  Transect lines spaced twenty meters apart were used to determime the corse-sectional areas that were integrated along the longitudinal profile to determine the volume. Comparing the volumes of the gully alcove, and channel with the volume of the debris apron  can yield an estimate on the likely water volume that may have been required to form the gully [3]. As the concavity along the stream profile can also be seen a direct correlation for water erosion; the more concave, the more erosion the stream has experienced. As an additional parameter, sinuosity was calculated.  Sinuosity of different gullies helps compare the meandering tendencies and their depositional volumes of sediment.  Sinuosity, or the ratio of the valley stream length over the channel length valley can show the trends of erosion along the channel walls [1].  We can then relate the higher sinuosity index value to the volume that is deposited at the curving banks as sediment deposit, versus the amount of sediment accumulated at the debris fan.   Results:  While gathering the data for the slope in comparision to its location (clockwise from the Northern position of Corozal Crater) no significant difference was seen in the slope of individual gullies.  The average slope of the twelve gullies studied was 19°, with a minimum slope of 14°, and a maximum slope of 21° (Figure 2).  These slopes fall within the range where fluvial processes would likely be more important than purely dry gravitational flows alone  [6].  Initial analysis of the resulting graphs seemed to show no overlying trend between the different gullies concerning their volume discharge or their stream con1198.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
cavity index (SCI) individually (Figure 3).  However, there was a common trend as noted by a sort of sinusoidial wave of the volume versus the location on the crater and the SCI versus location.  This shows a direct correlation between the volume discharge versus and how it is ultimately impacted by its stream concavity index.   Future Work: Further data gathering such as sediment deposits in the debris aprons is needed to calculate sediment transport volumes.  This will showcase a mathematical approach by calculating the amount of sediment eroded from the gully itself, and the amount of sediment that has been deposited in the form of a debris fan at the end of its respective gully.  Other future data analysis would compare the stream concavity index and the gully's relative age.  Through the geologic law of superposition, we can examine the different gullies and their debris flows in accordance to one another to relatively age the gullies by the overlapping apron fans.  The age information can then be compared to the SCI and analysis can be made whether older gullies indeed have a higher SCI as compared to the relatively younger gullies.   These principles of methodology will also be applied to future analysis of crater with varying parameters.  Gullies located on different geologic features i.e. dunes, or valley walls, as well as the gully locations can use the same parameters for future planetary fluvial processes.  Future analysis may also include studying the same locations through different Mars Reconnasaince Orbiter, HiRISE mission fly bys to examine the creation of new gullies, study the history of past gullies, and overall look at the geology in and around the area that can help us prove that water has indeed been the principle form of transportation for this sediment.                     References:  [1] Kirkby, M. J., and L. J. Bracken. (2009) Earth Surface Processes and Landforms 34.14: 1841-851. [2] Mangold, N., A. et al. (2010) JGR-Planets  115.E11 [3] Gulick, Virginia C., and Victor R. Baker. (1990) JGR-Planets,14th. 95.B9: 325-44 [4] Shepherd, R. G. (1985) The Journal of Geology 93.3: 377-84. [5] Ritter, Dale F. Process Geomorphology. Dubuque, IA: W.C. Brown, 1978. [6] ENVI. Boulder, CO: Research Systems, Inc., 2005. Computer software.    Figure 2 Slope of twelve gullies with respect to their location on the crater.  The minimal variety in slope proved to be a control factor for the tested parameters. Figure 1 Corozal Crater Longitude: 159.4°, Latitude: -38.7°, Left Observation: PSP_006261_1410 Right Observation: ESP_014093_1410, North Azimuth: 270°, Diameter: 8.33 km  Figure 3 and 4 Volume discharge of the gullies versus location and SCI versus location in the crater gullies.  Data is based off perpendicular transect lines of the longitudinal profile of each gully.  Both graphs represent a clear relationship between eroded volume and SCI.  1198.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
