1273.PDF
THE EFFECT OF THERMAL GRADIENTS ON THE MAJOR AND TRACE ELEMENT DISTRIBUTION IN FE-NI-O MELTS: IMPLICATIONS FOR CHEMICAL REDISTRIBUTION DURING PLANETARY ACCRETION.  N. R. Bennett1 and Y. Fei1., 1Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institutition of Washington, 5251 Broad Branch Road NW, Washington, D.C, 20015. nbennett@ciw.edu   Introduction: It is well documented that when subject to a thermal gradient, multi-component melts may develop compositional gradients [1]. The sense of major element redistribution is oriented to minimize the kinetic-energy imbalance between hot and cold portions of the system. The magnitude of compositional separation and exact arrangement of melt components, however, depend upon activity-composition relationships; with strongly non-ideal systems promoting the formation of larger compositional gradients [1]. Trace elements are controlled by the major element composition and are distributed in a manner that maintains their activity at an approximately constant value throughout the system [2]. We have conducted experiments at high pressure and temperature to investigate the distribution of highly siderophile elements (HSE), W and Mn in metallic Fe-Ni-O melts subject to a thermal gradient. The results of these experiments can be used to determine the HSE distribution during equilibrium partitioning that involves an oxygenbearing metal phase. Theoretical Background: During solid metalliquid metal partitioning, HSE compatibility varies as a function of the light-element concentration in the liquid phase [3-5]. Solid metal-liquid metal partition coefficients (Dsol/liq) typically increase as the lightelement content of the liquid increases, with a magnitude characterized by the non-metal interaction parameter (β) [3]:     lnDsol / liq = lnD0 + βln(1−αnXo)     (1)  where D0 is the partition coefficient in the lightelement-free system, n is a constant related to the stoichiometry of the dissolved light-element species and α is a constant specific to the compositional system being investigated. Plotting ln(1-αnX0) versus experimentally measured values of lnDsol/liq therefore defines a line with a slope equal to β. It has been demonstrated that values of β can also be determined from the magnitude of compositional gradients developed in thermal diffusion experiments [6]. This approach has the advantage of allowing values of β to be obtained from a single experiment, providing run-durations are sufficient to achieve steady-state. The dependence of β on temperature may also be assessed using the linearity of these plots, potentially avoiding the necessity for an intensive experimental program.  Experiments and Applications: Preliminary experiments have been conducted for the Fe-Ni-O system at 15 GPa and 2473 – 2623 K, using a 1500 tonne multi-anvil press with 8 mm truncated edge length WC cubes. We employed ZrO2 octahedra containing rhenium resistance heaters surrounding a crushable MgO sleeve and Al2O3 capsule. Starting materials comprised Fe, Ni and FeO powders mixed with ~ 200 ppm each of the platinum group metals, W, Mn, Re and Au. Xray mapping of the run-products from these experiments reveals major element compositional gradients, with Fe and Ni enriched toward the low-temperature portion of the assembly. Trace element contents of the run-products can be determined by laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry and are expected to display profiles qualitatively similar to thermal diffusion experiments in the Fe-Ni-S system; i.e. non-metal avoidance behaviour [6]. Values of β for the HSE, W and Mn will allow the effects of oxygen to be incorporated into models of core solidification, in the manner previously described for metallic liquids containing S, P and C [5]. Also, recalling that:  Dliq / sil = Dsol / sil ×1Dsol / liq    (2) where the subscript sil refers to molten silicate. β can be extended to the metal-silicate system, yielding:       lnDmet / sil[ ]P ,T , fO2 = lnD0* − βln(1−αnXo)    (3)  where D0* is the metal-silicate partition coefficent for light-element-free metallic melt. Implicit in equation 3 is that the addition of oxygen to the metal phase does not affect the solution of trace elements in the silicate melt; a reasonable assumption given the minor effect this would have on silicate melt composition. These experimental results may therefore be used to estimate the effect of oxygen dissolved in Fe-metal on HSE, W and Mn partitioning between the core and mantle during planetary accretion and differentiation. References: [1] Lesher C. E. and Walker D. (1986a) GCA., 50, 1397-1411. [2] Lesher, C. E. et al. (1997) JGR., 91, 6123-6141. [3] Jones, J. H. Malvin, D. J. (1990) Metall. Trans. B., 21B, 697-706. [4] Walker, D. (2000) GCA., 64, 2897-2911. [5] Chabot, N. L. & Jones, J. H. (2003) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 38, 1425-1436. [6] Brenan, J. M. & Bennett, N. R. (2010) EPSL., 298, 299-305.  1273.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
