1297.PDF
THE EFFECT OF POROSITY ON THE THERMAL INERTIA OF PEBBLE GRAVEL. S. Baker1, A. Breitfeld2, R. Quiambao3, M. Hassan4, R. Hassan5, O. Wingate6, A. Baker7 and T. Williamson8 1,2,3,7 and 8Durham Academy Upper School, Durham, NC, 4,5Riverside High School, Durham, NC 6Northern High School, Durham, NC.  Introduction: THEMIS (THermal EMission Imaging System) is an instrument on the Mars Odyssey orbiting spacecraft that measures visual and infrared wavelengths [1].  Information from THEMIS can demonstrate diurnal heating and cooling curves of Martian sediment and can be used to calculate thermal inertia (i.e. resistance to change in temperature) of the soil. Thermal inertia can be used to deduce the composition of the Martian surface [2]. It is assumed that the main variables that affect thermal inertia are the grain size and albedo of the sediment. The MONS (Mars Outreach for North Carolina Students) program conducted an experiment to assess the effect of porosity as an additional factor on thermal inertia.  Analytical Approach:  To test the thermal inertia of gravel with varied porosities, the surface temperature of gravel samples ("pebble gravel" on the Udden-Wentworth scale; rock fragments between 10 and 40 millimeters [3]) was measured as the samples were heated and then allowed to cool. The gravel samples were heated with a lamp that generated 630 watts per square meter, which simulates the 590 watts per square meter experienced by Mars's surface. A infrared reptile lamp was used because it emits a wide range of energy, including ultra-violet light, similar to the range found on Mars. The temperature was measured using infrared thermometers.  The gravel was collected from the Eno River in Durham, North Carolina and was sieved and rinsed to remove observable clay and dust. The samples were then baked to remove residual water.  The porosity of the uncompressed gravel was determined by carefully pouring it into a graduated cylinder. Water was then added to the cylinder until level with the top of the gravel. We calculated that the porosity of uncompressed gravel was 46 percent (i.e. 46 percent of the gravel was pore space).  Compressed gravel was generated by vigorously compacting loose gravel. To compress the gravel, a bucket was placed on top of the sample, and a sledgehammer was used to tamp it down for 2 minutes. The final compacted sample was compressed to an average 83 percent of the un-compacted volume. Therefore, the average porosity of compressed gravel was calculated as 37 percent. The experiment was configured according to the diagram in Figure 1. Twelve centimeters of uncompressed gravel was placed in a 26 cm diameter cylindrical plastic container. The container was not moved after it was poured so that the gravel would not settle and reduce the porosity. Prior to the start of the experiment, beginning surface temperature was measured three times at the center of the sample to confirm initial thermal stability. The heat lamp was subsequently turned on and temperature readings were recorded every 30 seconds for 60 minutes. After that time, the lamp was turned off. The temperature readings were again recorded every 30 seconds for an additional 60 minutes as the sample cooled.  Figure 1 The uncompressed sample was then compacted as described above. The experiment was repeated with the compressed gravel. The entire experiment with uncompressed and compressed gravel was performed a total of 3 times. For both gravel samples, a graph of the average temperature readings at each time point was plotted using Excel (Microsoft Excel for Mac 2011, version 14.2.2). An exponential mathematical model was determined to describe the heating phase of each curve. A second exponential model was determined to describe the cooling phase. Modeling was performed using Logger Pro 3 (Vernier Logger Pro 3, version 3.8.6.1).  Results: The initial surface temperature of uncompressed gravel started an average of 1.5° C greater than the average initial temperature of compressed gravel. To more clearly compare temperature change over time, the graph shown in Figure 2 includes a +1.5° C offset of all temperatures for the compressed gravel. Figure 2 1297.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
As shown in the graph in Figure 2, compressed gravel appears to absorb heat more quickly than uncompressed gravel. In an hour, the average temperature of compressed gravel increased 7.3° C. The average temperature of uncompressed gravel increased only 6.6° C. Temperature changes during the cooling phase were more complicated. Visually, the uncompressed gravel appears to cool more quickly than the compressed gravel for the first 20 minutes after the lamp was turned off. Subsequently, the temperature of the uncompressed sample plateaued for another 21 minutes (t = 80 minutes). However, the cooling curves intersect at the 101-minute mark before diverging again.  Exponential mathematical models describing the experimental heating and cooling curves for both uncompressed and compressed samples are shown in Figure 3. These models do not include the 1.5° C offset shown in Figure 2.  Despite the apparent difference in the heating and cooling of the two samples shown in Figure 2, the mathematical models demonstrate nearly parallel curves, suggesting that both samples heated and cooled at similar rates.   Figure 3  Discussion: The empiric curves and the mathematical models show different presentations of the data. While the curves in Figure 2 appear to show a difference in the thermal inertias of compressed and uncompressed gravel, the mathematical models demonstrate that the curves are nearly identical. The empiric graphs were generated by averaging the three temperatures for each time point, while the exponential curves were generated by plotting all three temperatures for each time point on a graph and finding the curve of best fit. Therefore, the mathematical model shows smooth curves with none of the fluctuations that are visible in Figure 2. Prior studies have demonstrated that thermal inertia increases as porosity decreases for Hawaiian basalts [4]. However, the study we present here does not definitively confirm that porosity affects thermal inertia for 10 to 40 mm pebble gravel.  There is no statistical evidence to prove that the small differences seen in the empiric curves show any real correlation between porosity and thermal inertia of gravel. It is not known whether the samples were compressed enough to significantly affect thermal inertia. Definitively demonstrating very small differences in thermal inertia would require an exceptionally well-controlled environment to precisely measure small changes in temperature. Our experimental setting did not permit such tight controls. In addition, more precise thermometers would be required. Future Work: In the future, this experiment could be repeated with a method of compression that is uniform throughout the sample and/or reduces the porosity to a greater extent. This could be used to determine whether a more pronounced change in porosity affects the thermal inertia of gravel. More precise thermometers could also be used to detect smaller temperature differences. Because Mars has an atmosphere thinner than that of Earth - Mar's atmospheric pressure is less than 1% that of Earth - the MONS team is interested in performing this experiment in a hypobaric chamber which can simulate the Martian environment. The relative lack of atmosphere could potentially change the way in which the samples heat and cool. Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Howard Lineburger, Samuel Fuerst, and Charles Payne for coordinating the MONS program and for their invaluable guidance in this experiment. Thanks to Dr. Jeff Moersch of the University of Tennessee, who is conducting similar research to design a model to best interpret THEMIS infrared data and has given MONS students advice throughout the project. We also thank Dennis Cullen, chair of the Mathematics Division at Durham Academy, for his help with the generation of the mathematical models. Thanks to Dr. Jay Baker for his editorial assistance. Finally, we would like to thank the Burroughs Welcome Fund for funding the MONS program. References:  [1]  <http://themis.asu.edu/about>. [2]  <http://www.boulder.swri.edu/inertia/>. [3] Wentworth CK, "A scale of grade and class terms for clastic sediments", J. Geology V. 30, 377-392 (1922).  [4] Zimbelman JR "The Role of Porosity in Thermal Inertia Variations on Basaltic Lavas" . ICARUS v68, 366-369 (1986).   Red= uncompressed Blue= compressed Green= compressed with +1.5° C offset 1297.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
