1310.PDF
PETROLOGY OF THE NEW ENRICHED LHERZOLITIC SHERGOTTITE NWA 7397: TWO-STAGES OF FORMATION.  G.H. Howarth1, J.F. Pernet-Fisher1, P.H. Barry1, R.J. Bodnar2, and L.A. Taylor1.  1Planetary Geosciences Institute, Earth and Planetary Sciences, Univ. of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN. (ghowarth@utk.edu; ). 2Dept. of Geosciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA.   Introduction:  Shergottites are classified into three distinct subgroups: 1) basaltic, 2) olivine-phyric, and 3) lherzolitic [1].  Lherzolitic shergottites are generally interpreted to represent cumulate rocks, whereas the basaltic and olivine-phyric are extrusive rocks.  Until recently, lherzolitic shergottites were classified as depleted, displaying sub-chondritic bulk-rock LREE profiles. However, Usui et al. [2] described a lherzolitic shergottite with distinct enrichments in LREEs, classifying the first enriched-lherzolitic shergottite (RBT 04261/2); to date, only one other example of an enriched-lherzolitic shergottite (GRV 020090) has been described [3].  Martian meteorite NWA 7397, described here, is a new example of a lherzolitic shergottite, characterized by an enriched whole-rock REE profile.  We report mineral major, trace, and REE chemistry for this enriched lherzolitic shergottite, and propose a two-stage formation model (Fig 1.).  Analytical techniques:  Two thin sections were cut from a ~3 g sample of NWA 7397, and analyzed for major- and minor-element compositions using the CAMECA SX-100 electron microprobe. Trace element concentrations were determined using the Agilent 7500 ce inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer, combined with an Excimer 193 nm ArF GeoLasPro laser ablation system.  Petrography:  The shergottite is characterized by two distinct textural regions: 1) poikilitic and 2) nonpoikilitic (Fig. 2), typical of lherzolitic shergottites.  The former region is characterized by coarse (~6000 µm) pyroxene oikocrysts, containing abundant inclusions of chromite and olivine.  Olivine chadacrysts commonly contain chromite inclusions.  The non-poikilitic region is comprised of, in order of crystallization; chromite, olivine, low-Ca pyroxene, high-Ca pyroxene, maskelynite, and merrillite.  Trace amounts of ilmenite, sulfide, baddeleyite, and apatite are also observed.  The meteorite shows significant effects of shock metamorphism.  Shock induced melt veins are commonly observed, along with less common shock melt pockets.         Mineral chemistry:  Olivines included within the cores of pyroxene oikocrysts have the most primitive composition (Fo70), and display a gradational evolution to more Fe-rich compositions (Fo60) in the nonpoikilitic region.  Pyroxene oikocrysts are zoned from low-Ca pyroxene cores, Wo4En71Fs25 - Wo9En64Fs27 to high-Ca rims (Wo35En48Fs17). Pyroxene oikocryst cores and rims are characterized by LREE-depleted profiles (Fig. 3a).  The total REE abundances are lower in the low-Ca oikocryst cores relative to the high-Ca pyroxene rims; the latter shows steeper LREEdepletion with (La/Yb)CI of ~0.2, whereas the former have relatively flat LREE-depletion profiles with (La/Yb)CI of ~0.6.  An interesting feature to note for the low-Ca pyroxene is a distinct La-Ce anomaly.  REE profiles of the maskelynite are LREE-enriched, with most of the HREEs close to, or below detection limit.  Merrillite is observed in the non-poikilitic region only, and has a homogeneous major-element composition.  Although merrillite occurs in trace amounts, it is the main carrier of REEs (La ~630 x CI).  Figure 1. Simplified model illustrating sources and formation of lherzolitic shergottites (Modified after Symes et al. [4]).  Discussion:  NWA 7397 is similar in texture, mineral chemistry, and whole-rock REE content to enriched lherzolitic shergottites GRV 020090 and RBT 04261/2 [2, 3, 5].  Therefore, it is classified as a new example of an enriched lherzolitic shergottite, and represents the third known example.   REE content of parental magma.  In order to estimate the REE contents of the original parental magma, melts in equilibrium with low-Ca oikocryst cores were calculated (Fig. 3b).  LREE-enriched melts calculated to be in equilibrium with pyroxene oikocrysts are a function of La-Ce anomalies observed  1310.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Figure 2.  a) Reflected light photomicrograph mosaic of a thin section of NWA 7397 showing two coarse pyroxene oikocrysts; b) FeKa compositional map of the lower pyroxene oikocryst in a).       Figure 3.  a) REE-normalized profiles for the average mineral compositions of NWA 7397. b) Calculated melts in equilibrium with the major minerals.  in CI-normalized concentration profiles. These anomalies are reported to be a characteristic feature of post-crystallization modification by impact melting processes [6].  Therefore, LREE-enriched recreated melts do not represent parental magmas.  In contrast to LREEs, HREEs are less prone to post-crystallization modification, and are useful for tracking changes in parent magmas during their evolution.  Late-stage minerals (merrillite, maskelynite; Fig. 3b) are characterized by low Tb/Lu ratios, relative to the earlier crystallized phases.  This indicates a change in the HREE concentrations of the parent magma at a relatively late stage of crystallization, after pyroxene crystallization, but before maskelynite and merrillite.   Two-stages of formation.  A model had been proposed by Lin et al. [5] for the formation of the lherzolitic shergottite GRV 020090, with early crystallization of a LREE-depleted magma to form the poikilitic lithology, followed by contamination by enriched crustal materials.  Here, we propose a modification of this model in order to account for the HREE evolution of the enriched lherzolitic shergottite NWA 7397.  Our two-stage model consists of:  1) crystallization of the poikilitic lithology from a parental melt with flat HREE profiles and (Tb/Lu = 1.5-2.0), which occurs at depth within a magma chamber; chromite, olivine, and low-Ca pyroxene crystallize and settle to the base of the chamber forming a cumulate pile (Fig 1.).  2) Crystallization of a second stage forming the non-poikilitic lithology.  Filiberto et al. [7] showed a positive correlation of Al/Ti with pressure for the crystallization of low-Ca pyroxene.  Al/Ti values for low-Ca pyroxene analyzed from the poikilitic and non-poikilitic regions of NWA 7397 indicate that the poikilitic minerals formed at greater depth.  This implies that the second stage of crystallization occurs at shallower levels relative to that of the first stage.  Therefore, we suggest that a later pulse of magma entered the magma chamber and entrained pyroxene cumulate crystals.  This magma then continued upward toward the surface crystallizing the non-poikilitic minerals en route or in a shallower magma chamber.  HREE-enrichment is likely the result of assimilation of crustal materials at a late stage of crystallization, which results in HREE-enrichments of the last minerals to crystallize (maskelynite and merrillite). References: [1] Goodrich, C.A. (2002) Meteor. & Planet. Sci, 37, B31; [2] Usui, T. et al. (2010) GCA 74, 7283; [3] Jiang, Y. & Hsu, W. (2012) Meteor. & Planet. Sci. 47, 1419; [4] Symes et al. (2008) GCA, 72, 1696-1710; [5] Lin, Y. et al. (2013) Meteor. & Planet. Sci. 48, 1572; [6] Crozaz, G. & Wadhwa, M. (2001) GCA 65, 971; [7] Filiberto, J. et al. (2010) Meteor. & Planet. Sci. 45, 1258. 1310.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
