 ESTIMATING EROSION RATES ON EARTH FROM THE NUMBER OF IMPACT CRATERS. S. Hergarten1, S. Bonitz1, and T. Kenkmann1, 1Institut für Geo- und Umweltnaturwissenschaften, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg i. Br., Germany Introduction: The repository of impact craters on Earth is incomplete due to erosion. Therefore, very few regions on Earth are suitable for estimating the crater production rate directly from the number of recognized craters, and even the perhaps most elaborate approach of this type [1] is exposed to a considerable uncertainty. The alternative approach to estimate the crater production rate on Earth uses the well-known lunar crater production rate [2]. Rescaling this rate according to the different escaping velocities of Earth and Moon and taking into account the effects of the atmosphere results in higher estimates of the production rate [3]. In this paper we address the opposite question. Knowing that the crater record on Earth is affected by erosion almost everywhere, we attempt to estimate erosion rates on a regional scale from the incompleteness of the crater inventory. Method: In order to arrive at a method that can easily be applied on a regional scale, we introduce the following simplifying assumptions: (i) The considered region has been exposed to a constant erosion rate r over a long time, so that a longterm equilibrium between the production of new craters and their consumption by erosion has been achieved. (ii) A crater is recognized as long as the total erosion since its production does not exceed its depth H. In this sense, depth is defined as the depth (relative to the original surface) down to which shock effects allow an unequivocal affirmation of the crater. We further assume that this depth only depends on the crater diameter D, so that the crater production rate can be transferred from diameters to depths. In the following we derive an equation for the expected number Nd(D) of detectable craters with a diameter greater than or equal to D per unit area under a given erosion rate r. Due to our first assumption, the lifetime τ of a crater of diameter D is τ(D) = H(D) r(1) where H(D) is the depth corresponding to this diameter. Let Ṅ(D) be the crater production rate, i. e., the number of craters with a size greater than or equal to D per unit area and time. Deviating from the literature we use Ṅ instead of N in order to clarify that it is a rate (per area) and to distinguish it from Nv which is is a number (per area). The corresponding frequency density is −Ṅ ′(D), where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to D. Then the number of detectable craters with a diameter greater than or equal to D per unit area is Nd(D) = ∞∫ D−Ṅ ′(u) τ(u) du (2) =1 r∞∫ D−Ṅ ′(u)H(u) du = I(D) r(3) where the integral I(D) = ∞∫ D−Ṅ ′(u)H(u) du (4) only depends on the minimum considered crater diameter D. According to Eq. 3, the expected number of craters with a diameter greater than or equal to D in a given region of area A is nd = ANd(D) = AI(D) r. (5) The ratio r = AI(D) n(6) is the maximum-likelihood estimate of the longterm erosion rate if n craters are found in the considered region. The error range of the estimated erosion rate is as important as the value itself. The uncertainty arising from the statistical variation of the impact process can be quantified using confidence intervals. If n craters were found, a lower bound rmin can be defined by the condition that more than n craters should occur at an erosion rate rmin with a given probability c, the so-called (one-sided) confidence level. In return, and upper bound rmax can be defined by the condition that less than n craters should occur at rmax with the probability c. As the number of craters follows a Poisson distribution with an expected value given by Eq. 5, the probability of finding k craters at an erosion rate r is pk(r) = nkd k! e−nd = (AI r)k k! exp (−AI r) (7)  10 -9 10 -8 10 -7 10 -6 0.1 1 10 100 I( D) [m m/( yr k m2 )] D [km] Figure 1: The integral I(D) (Eq. 4) as a function of the minimum considered crater size D where we have omitted the arguments D. The confidence interval is then given by the conditions ∞∑ k=n+1 pk(rmin) = n−1∑ k=0 pk(rmax) = c. (8) Application: Computing the integral given by Eq. 4 requires a function Ṅ(D) for the crater production and a function H(D) for the crater depths. As the production function suggested by Bland and Artemieva [3] extends to smaller crater sizes and seems to be more reliable at intermediate crater sizes than the one suggested by Hughes [1], this one is used in the following. Relatively little is known about H, the depth of erosion down to which a crater remains detectable by means of shock effects. For simple craters (D ≤ 3 km) we used a linear fit for the true crater depth [4] and assumed that shock features are present down to a depth of 0.07 times the true depth beneath the autochthonous crater floor in agreement with experimental results. For complex crater structures (D > 3 km) we approximated a linear trend betweenD andH from data of deeply eroded or drilled impact structures such as Upheaval Dome, Siljan, Puchezh-Katunki, and the Vredefort Dome: H(D) = {0.307D D ≤ 3 km 0.07D + 0.71 km for D > 3 km (9) Figure 1 shows the result obtained by numerical integration where the tabulated values of Ṅ(D) from [3] were interpolated by piecewise power-law functions. Using small values of the minimum crater diameter D taken into account increases the number of Table 1: Maximum-likelihood estimates and 95 % confidence intervals (one-sided) for the erosion rates in the three considered regions Region CP QC YC A [km2] 337000 1542056 720000 n 2 9 1 r [mm yr ] 0.015 0.015 0.065 rmin [ mm yr ] 0.005 0.009 0.014 rmax [ mm yr ] 0.085 0.030 1.26 craters and thus reduces the statistical errors. However, D must not be too small in order to ensure that the inventory of the craters which have not been consumed by erosion is complete. We therefore use D = 1 km in the following. For this value we obtain I(D) = 9.0 × 10−8 mmyr km2 . Results and Discussion: Table 1 gives the results of applying our method to three regions: The Colorado Plateau (CP), Quebec (QC), and the Yilgarn Craton (YC) in south western Australia. Due to the small number of craters, the error ranges are rather large and probably exceed the potential systematic errors arising from our choice of the functions Ṅ(D) and H(D). The relatively narrowest 95 % confidence interval (Quebec, 9 craters) amounts to about half a decade, while the widest (Yilgarn Craton, 1 crater) spans two decades. Reference values for long-term erosion rates are available for two of the three regions. For the Colorado Plateau, a rate of 0.028 mmyr was estimated [5], while values from 0.01 to 0.025 mmyr were obtained in the crystalline terranes of south western Australia [6]. The value for the Colorado Plateau falls well into our 95 % confidence interval, while those of SW Australia are at its lower edge. In summary, our approach provides a simple method to estimate long-term erosion rates on a regional scale from data which are already available. Potential sources of systematical errors beyond those discussed above are sedimentation phases in sedimentary rocks and a bias in the delineation of the region due to the knowledge on existing craters. References: Hughes, D. W. (2000) Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 317, 429-437. Neukum, G. et al. (2001) Space Sci. Rev., 96, 55-86. Bland, P. A. and Artemieva, N. A. (2006) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 41, 607-631. Grieve, R. A. F. and Pilkington, M. (1996) J. AGSO Australian Geol. Geophys., 16, 399-420. Pederson, J. L. et al. (2002) GSA Today, 12 (8), 410. Kohn, B. P. et al. (2002) Aust. J. Earth Sci., 49, 697-717. 