 THE CHOTT EL JERID MARS ANALOG EXPEDITION.  Kereszturi A. 1,2,4 , Dulai S. 2,3 , Marschall M. 2,3 , Pócs T. 2,3 , Pócs Tamásné 2,3 , 1 MTA Research Center for Astronomy and Earth Sciences, Konkoly Thege Miklós Astronomical Institute, 2 New Europe School for Theoretical Biology and Ecology, 3 Eszterházy Károly College, Eger, 4 NASA Astrobiology Institute TDE Focus Group. (E-mail: kereszturi.akos@csfk.mta.hu)  Introduction: Between 13 th and 26 th of September 2013, a Mars analog expedition was organized and realized in Tunisia (Figure 1) by the members of the Mars Astrobiology Group of Hungary. This first report gives as an overview of the work presenting examples of the three main projects: 1. collection of cryptobiotic crust samples consisting mostly of cyanobacteria and lichens, in some places also from mosses for new Mars simulation tests [1,2], 2. analysis of ephemeral fluvial channels, 3. testing ground-truth at Mars analog terrain comparing remote and in-situ images.   Figure 1. Map of the route followed during the expedition  Altogether 5 persons participated in the field work, driving total 2100 km distance, including 39 stops, collecting around 15 kg samples ( 600 specimen) and recording 2000 images. The target region was the Chott el Jerid area in Tunisia, because of its dryness, elevated UV insolation and Mars relevant salt concentration of chlorides and sulfates [3].    Table 1. Example habitat types The main aim of the field work was the collection of extremophil cryptobiotic crusts colonized by cyanobacteria, adapted to dryness and elevated salt concentration. Duringt the collecting the local environment was also analyzed, to identify its basic effects on the habitability of the micro-environment of the crust. Some example habitat types are visible in Table 1.   Figure 2. Stop no. 13143 (N 34 06.892, E 09 09.002, +250 m)  An interesting example is visible in Figure 2. where bacteria (probably Chlorococcales) were colonized a interior fractures of large gypsum containing rock. They might get access to water when it is infiltrated after a rainy period, but also withstand osmotic stress that time. Along the decreasing annual precipitation probably the colour and the UV-screening effectivity is also important in surviving and keeping up metabolic activity under the unfavourable combination of environmental factors.   Figure 3. Lichen images recorded at regions getting more dry.  Ephemeral fluvial channels (wadis or locally called Queds) are useful Mars analogs in the region because of their ephemeral activity, exotic rivers (end in the desert with smoothly disappearing), pouring their water into a closed endhoreic basin, and their water especially the ponding volume is enriched in salts. Example case studies are presented below.  Theather shaped non-sapping valleys were identified in the region (Figure 3), that resemble to some Martian valleys suspected to be formed by subsurface sapping. In the region somewhat similar valleys could be identified on satellite images although smaller than the Martian ones, but their local analysis and the general knowledge on the terrain suggest they are formed by precipitation. The theather shaped terimation, and the step valley from the very beginning might be the result of the rare but heavy rains and the loose, poorly cemented regolith that can be easily destroyed by rains.   Figure 3. Satellite image of theater shaped valley terminations (right), and in-situ images (left, hammer for scale)  Salty basin: in the Chott el Jerid region no obvious bank of the standing water after rains could be observed, although substantial albedo differences could be identified. In this area darker surface covering than the surrounding region could be identified as a clay rich deposit, while in the deepest area bright salt layer mark the longest duration area of existence for the evaportation concentrated brines.   Figure 4. Satellite image (left)  and 4 cross profiles of ephemeral river valleys (right) at the northern part of the region  The topographic analysis also showed features characteristic for sedimentary processes at a dry region: undulating bahada at the foot of the hills, and extremely smooth terrain further away where the rivers laid down their sediments (Figure 5). Ground truth analysis is useful both for scientific interpretation and mission targeting. During the expedition characteristic surface features were recorded and compared to remotely based satellite images of the same structure. Some examples are visible in Figure 6.  Figure 5. Topography to the region (top) and three profiles (below) showing terrains with different undulation   Figure 6. Satellite images of the area (top) and in-situ images in the 2., 3., 4. rows of features observable on satellite images  Acknowledgment: This work was supported by the ESA ECS-project Co 4000105405 (No. 98076.), the OTKA PD 105970, and the research fund from the Hungarian Academy for the Astrophysical and Geochemical Laboratory. References: [1] de Vera et al. 2013. Int. J. Astrobio. doi 10.1017/S1473550413000323 [2] Dulai et al. 2013 LPSC #1971. [3] Baldridge et al. 2007. AGU Fall Meeting #P13E-04. 