1388.PDF
TRANSIENT BRIGHT "HALOS" ON THE SOUTH POLAR RESIDUAL CAP OF MARS: IMPLICATIONS FOR MASS-BALANCE P. Becerra1, S. Byrne1, A. J. Brown2, 1Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. becerra@lpl.arizona.edu. 2SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA, USA.  Introduction: The CO2 ice South Polar Residual Cap (SPRC) on Mars may be a sensitive indicator of interannual planetary climate variability. Imaging by HiRISE [1], and CTX [2] found that many scarps and pits in the "Swiss cheese terrain" [3] of the SPRC exhibited a bright "halo" around their edges (fig. 1). These halos appeared during Martian southern summer in Mars Year 28 (MY28, [4]), and have been observed in only one of eight mars years for which observations at high enough resolution exist. We hypothesize that the formation of these features is linked to the late-summer global dust storm of MY28 and report on observations, formation models, and implications for mass balance of the SPRC.   Fig. 1. Examples of sites on the SPRC that displayed halos during MY 28.  Observations: We surveyed data from HiRISE, CTX, and CRISM [5] to constrain the optical properties and composition of the halos, as well as their time of appearance and location within the SPRC. The halos appeared throughout most of the SPRC between Ls 280º and 330º in MY28 (fig. 2). The widest portions of the halos occurred adjacent to north-facing walls, and the brightest parts to sun-facing walls, which points to a connection between insolation and halo appearance. CRISM spectral products ruled out the presence of water ice as a factor in the halos' appearance. These data also indicate larger CO2 ice grain sizes where the bright halos were seen, which are normally associated with lower, rather than higher, albedos [6]. Thus, we were able to also rule out CO2 ice grain size differences as the main cause for the halos, which left us with the possibility that the halos appeared due to differences in dust content between the terrain adjacent to the pit walls and the surrounding ice. HiRISE BG/RED color ratios show halos are less red than surrounding ice and so support this formation mechanism.  Reflectance Modeling: We constructed a Hapke [7] surface reflectance model for a surface composed only of CO2 ice and dust. The refraction indices were obtained from [8], and [9]. The CO2 ice grain size, dust volumetric content and dust particle size were free parameters. We used the HiRISE and CRISM bandpass coefficients to simulate HiRISE albedo and CRISM spectra, and attempted to match the HiRISE RED albedo, HiRISE BG/RED, and CRISM 1.43 µm band depths.  A self-consistent set of CO2 ice grain sizes and dust contents can explain the appearance of the halos (fig. 3). As the halos have larger ice grains, small dust deficiencies in the halos explain their brighter appearance. Our model results, when compared to the observations, constrain the composition of the ice to a small range of parameter space (10 - 20 µm dust grains at ~ 0.03 % (halos) - 0.06 % (surroundings), in ~8 mm CO2 ice grains), and show that small differences in dust content are responsible for the halos.   Fig. 2. Temporal distribution over MY and Ls of all HiRISE and MOC images examined. The yellow dots rep-resent those images in which halos were seen.    Fig. 3. Example of a surface-composition map made using our Hapke reflectance model. Shaded regions indicate the observed values of each of the three parameters (RED, BG/RED, 1.43 mm band depth) for one time of year, at one site. The intersection of the shaded regions limits the composition of the surface to a particular combination of CO2 ice grain size, dust content, and dust grain size. This particular map corresponds to 15 µm dust grains, which in this case produced the best fit to the observations. 1388.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Conceptual Model: A plausible halo-formation mechanism could be that an outward flow of gas caused by the higher sublimation rate from the pit walls, acts to deflect settling dust particles, effectively keeping these areas clean of dust and causing them to appear brighter than their surroundings (fig. 4). This indicates that it was the cap that darkened rather than the halos brightening. The timing of the halos' disappearance (~Ls 330º) coincides with the end of southern summer. Therefore, it is likely that condensing CO2 frost at the onset of winter covered the halos.    Fig. 4. Schematic of our model for the formation of SPRC halos. The higher sublimation rate on a slope raises the local partial pressure of CO2 creating a "sublimation-wind" that blows settling dust grains away from the slope and keeps near-pit areas relatively dust-free.  Implications for Mass Balance: Small changes in SPRC albedo can have large effects on the cap's stability, and may make the difference between net accumulation and net ablation for that year. HiRISE observations confirm that after the halo occurrence at the end of summer in MY28, the residual cap defrosted more extensively than usual (fig. 5). If our model is correct, halos require settling dust to form and so are not expected in non-dust-storm years. However, two other MY with dust storms deserve special mention. MY25 also had a global dust storm, but during southern spring rather than southern summer. MOC was observing the SPRC at the time and did not observe halos. This suggests that spring sublimation is too weak to create an outward flow of gas from the pit walls that is sufficiently strong to deflect falling dust grains i.e. halos didn't appear on MY25 because the cap was coated evenly with dust. This is consistent with thermal modeling, which shows slower sublimation rates from pit walls during the spring when they are covered with bright seasonal frost. MY9 had a late-southern-summer dust storm similar to that of MY28. Mariner 9 observed a variegated SPRC immediately afterward (resolution is too coarse to see halos, but we expect them to have been present). This suggests that there was widespread defrosting in response to the dust storm. In MY12 Viking showed the cap had fully recovered (fig. 3 in [10]), and appeared similar to generic non-storm years. HiRISE shows a similar (but less severe) sequence of events on the SPRC after the MY28 dust storm (fig. 5).  What do the halos tell us about the mass-balance of the SPRC? Their timing indicates that they were buried by seasonal frost by the end of MY28.  Since they were not exhumed during late summer of MY29, or in any subsequent year, we can assume that flat surfaces in the SPRC underwent net accumulation during over MY29-31. Thus, the SPRC in non dust-storm years appears to have net accumulation on flat surfaces even while the steeply inclined walls of the pits retreat several meters per year through ablation.   Fig. 5. Section of the SPRC at a halo site during four different MY. Defrosting after MY28 was more pronounced than in later years, meaning that the cap recovered from a year with stronger than usual sublimation.  Conclusions: Our modeling and observations allow us to draw two important conclusions:  1. In order for halos to form on the SPRC, special conditions must be met that require the presence of higher-than-usual amount of dust in the atmosphere at the correct time of year. This not only darkens the cap through the settling of dust, but it also increases the sublimation rates through an increase in atmospheric heating [11].  2. The single-time, ephemeral occurrence of halos indicates that the layer of ice that darkened as a result of the dust storm, and surrounded the halos, was not exhumed in subsequent years, implying a positive mass balance for flat surfaces on the SPRC during MY29, and net positive mass balance from the end of MY28 through the end of MY31.   References: [1] McEwen et al. JGR 112 (2007). [2] Malin et al., JGR 112 (2007). [3] Thomas et al., Icarus 203 (2009). [4] Clancy et al., JGR 105 (2000). [5] Murchie et al., JGR 112 (2007). [6] Brown et al., JGR 115 (2010). [7] Hapke, B., Cambridge Univ. Press (2012). [8] Hansen, JGR 110 (2005). [9] Wolff et al., JGR 114 (2009). [10] Thomas et al., Icarus 225 (2013). [11] Bonev et al., Planet. Spac. Sci. (2008).  1388.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
