 THE PDS4 ARCHIVE: INTEGRATED MIGRATION OF THE MARS PHOENIX DATA Lynn D. V. Neakrase1, Lyle F. Huber1, Reta F. Beebe1, Shannon K. Rees1, Jeffrey Jasek1, Ernesto Gonzalez1, Edward A. Guinness2, Amy Culver3, Dan Crichton4, J. Steven Hughes4, Sean Hardman4 1Department of Astronomy, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 2Earth and Planetary Sciences, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130 3Planetary Data System Imaging Node, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91109  4Planetary Data System Engineering Node, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA 91109  Introduction: The NASA Planetary Data System (PDS) is the distributed system of discipline nodes responsible for the archive of all planetary data acquired by robotic missions, manned missions, and observational campaigns through ground/space-based observation systems. Beginning early in 2014, the PDS will be publicly moving from version 3 to version 4 of its archival system. Of greatest concern moving forward is preserving the integrity of older data sets, while achieving improved accessibility and streamlined processes for new data entering the archive.  Migration of the older data is of the utmost importance while maintaining seamless usability during the transition.  Currently, transition to the new archive system has begun with the infrastructure moving from the PDS3 Catalog system to a centralized PDS4 Registry system.  The first publically available PDS4 'native' data will include missions that are designated early adopters, which includes LADEE, MAVEN, VeSpR, InSight, and OSIRIS-REx.  Migrated datasets will also become available as their migration is completed. One set of the early migration datasets is Mars Phoenix archive. Because of its moderate size, completeness, and relatively low complexity, the Phoenix data offer a good test case for completing a migration of an entire integrated mission that uses multiple PDS discipline nodes (Specifically Geosciences at Washington University, Atmospheres at New Mexico State University, and Imaging at JPL) for its archive.     The Past (PDS3): The PDS3 system implemented a label/product duet for each item within the archive [1]. The labels were implemented in the Object Description Language (ODL) developed and maintained by JPL/Caltech (used only by the PDS), which could be used as attached or detached labels.  ODL allowed for a human-readable, "KEYWORD = VALUE" structure, that was not always the easiest for software to parse or use efficiently. Directory structures were organized specifically with physical media in mind (e.g., Magnetic Tape, CDs, DVDs, etc.) [1].  Data sets were organized into volumes that could easily be written onto physical media, which were designed specifically for transfer from archive to user (or user to user). Retrieval of data was based on search routines maintained by the individual discipline nodes and was not well-suited for overlapping datasets present within the archive housed at different nodes.  The Future (PDS4): PDS4 is the new incarnation of the PDS archiving system. With PDS4, many of the perceived problems and shortcomings of the PDS3 system have been addressed. Organization and implementation are designed around the modern idea of all data being delivered to users across internetbased systems.  PDS4 is an object-oriented system based on a central Information Model, from which everything within the system is defined explicitly [2].  This differs greatly from PDS3 and provides continuity across discipline nodes, which has not been present in the past.  The catalog system has been replaced by the new central registry, which allows more information to be uniformly ingested and tracked across the system.  The registry allows metadata to be registered across the PDS, allowing better crossreferencing between various data products and between other discipline nodes. This approach also facilitates search and retrieval at the individual product level. PDS4 is product-centric. A "product" is defined as a label file and the object (data, document, etc.) it describes.The new system replaces the use of ODL (managed by JPL/Caltech, used only by PDS) with eXtensible Markup Language (XML)[2,3].  XML is widely accepted as a modern standard for encoding data for use on the Internet by providing enhanced machine readability, focused on simplicity and generality [3]. XML allows commercially available and open source software to use the PDS archive without extensive modification, which should allow for better, more wide-spread usage of PDS data. The first public release of the PDS4 system should be expected in early to mid 2014 with the release of VeSpR, LADEE, and selected migrated datasets, like Mars Phoenix.  Contents Organization: PDS4 products are organized into focused "collections" with separate collections for observational data products, calibration products, browse products, document products, etc. PDS currently identifies nine broad collection types. Related collections are then organized into logical bundles. A bundle, for example, might consist of the collections, which together contain all products from an instrument on a specific mission. Within the bundle, there could be one collection for raw, calibrated, and reduced data products, or there might be three separate collections (one each for raw, calibrated, and reduced data products), a collection for calibration products, a collection for document products, and a collection for browse products.  Design of the bundle and collection structures for Phoenix has been important for developing best practices and standardization of the archive organization and interfacing for data providers and end-users. In general (although not limited to) individual instruments/experiments are organized into bundles, with an extra bundle (Mission Bundle) used as coordinating entity that houses documents, context  products, mission dictionaries, etc. that are common across all of the instruments/experiments. Within each bundle common collections can be found. Context collections are used for context products that provide linkages for the Registry system. Document collections provide useful documents for using/understanding the data and may potentially contain PDS3 informative files (old ODL labels, documentation, etc.). Data collections can be organized by processing level, as word descriptions (e.g., data_raw, data_calibrated, data_reduced, etc.).  There is also typically an xml_schema collection that contains links to all XML schema/schematron and mission (or node) dictionary files used in the creation of the XML labels. These collections are uniform across all the nodes and all of PDS4 and are similarly organized for all datasets including missions, ground observations, or one-time instruments alike.  PDS4 User Access: Whereas past PDS archive efforts focused on discipline-level search capabilities to allow users to find their desired data products at the appropriate discipline nodes, the PDS4 system aims to bring discipline expertise to a centralized system by allowing users to access any data from each of the discipline nodes through a built-in series of linkages that occur within the Registry system.  Data products that were perhaps previously isolated can now be cross-linked allowing the system to provide useful connectivity to the search results. For example with the Phoenix migration effort, atmospheric opacity data products at the Atmospheres Node are derived from the Surface Stereoscopic Imager (SSI) images archived at the Imaging Node.  In PDS3, the opacity data at the Atmospheres Node and the raw images at the Imaging Node were available with little or no cross-reference at the respective nodes.  Users may not have been aware of the other data's existence depending on the user's previous expertise with the data products.  PDS4 through links within the XML labels as well as redesigned web interfaces are changing the way users understand not only the Phoenix Mission, but also how the data were collected, and what were the related resources for creating the calibrated and derived products.  Web interfaces for many mission holdings in the PDS are being redesigned with a "one-stop-shopping" approach to allow users to delve more deeply (as needed) into how data products are related and what data products are currently available within the PDS as a whole.  Web access to PDS4 Registry systems has been identified as an area of important development. Through a series of migration and design development tests utilizing not only discipline node personnel but also a varied group of data providers and users from the community, the Atmospheres Node tested migration of the Phoenix data and presentation of it to the community.  Dubbed a "Beta-Test" of the user interface, the results provided valuable feedback for refining the interactions with our users, including availability of information throughout the website and reactions to the new XML label format. We have expanded our web efforts in preparation for the LADEE and MAVEN data (arriving early 2014 and 2015 respectively), and Phoenix migration across the entire mission including the Geosciences and Imaging Nodes is progressing. The goal is to have a seamless interface for providing information about the mission, and the instruments while also providing access to the data products with enough readily accessible documentation to allow users to do science as efficiently as possible. Phoenix organization will serve as a prototype effort for future migrations and development for the upcoming new missions.  Geosciences is the "lead" node for Phoenix and will house the Mission Bundle and 5 instrument/experiment bundles. Imaging will host 3 bundles, and Atmospheres, 5 bundles.  From the web interface, a user should be able to "float" from dataset to dataset, without necessarily seeing vast differences between nodes.   PDS4 represents a major revision of the PDS Archive system, with a focus on modern web interface for digital distribution of planetary data.  The federated PDS system of Discipline Nodes still allows discipline-specific expertise and important linkages between the individual science communities while PDS4 provides a modern environment for navigating through and efficiently providing access to data for cross-disciplinary studies.      References: [1] PDS Standards Reference, Version 1.0.0 (2013); [2] Data Preparers Handbook, version 1.0.0 (2013); [3] Extensible Markup Language, http://www.w3.org/XML, (2011)  PHOENIX ATMOSPHERES WEBSITE: http://atmos.nmsu.edu/pds4beta/phoenix/phoenix.html 