 THE JAVELIN CONCEPT: A SWARM OF SCIENTIFIC MICROPROBES TO THE CLOUDS OF JUPITER IN 2030.  J.E. Moores1,  K.A. Carroll2, I. DeSouza1, K. Sathiyanathan1, B. Stoute1, J. Shan1, R.S. Lee1 and B. Quine1 1Centre for Research in Earth and Space Science, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3 Canada (jmoores@yorku.ca), 2University of Toronto Institute for Aerospace Studies, Toronto, ON Canada.   Introduction:  Over the last 20 years, advances in miniaturization and electronics design have made practical a completely new class of small space vehicle in near earth orbits. Such micro, nano and cube satellites, some with masses of a kg or less, have lowered the cost of access to space [1] and have enabled many groups who were previously economically restrained from participating in larger missions to design their own satellites end to end in order to do small-scale science and test engineering advances on-orbit. However, this revolution in near-earth space has not, thus far, extended to missions beyond GEO. There are several compelling reasons for this. First, the small size of microsats limits the amount of power they may acquire from solar arrays. This problem becomes especially acute at large distances from the sun. Secondly, such satellites are limited by their low mass in the variety of payloads they may carry. Most critically, the large distances from the Earth required for interplanetary missions require large high gain antennas, powerful transmitters, and large ground stations in order to be practical.  Despite this environment, there are certain niche applications in planetary exploration that could benefit from the microsat concept [2]. The key is the clever utilization of pre-existing assets. At Mars, this consists of the large number of insitu orbiters with relay capability that reduces the distance over which the microsat or ground station must communicate to a few hundred to a few thousand kilometers. The question to be addressed in this paper is whether the anticipated presence of ESA's JUICE orbiter in the Jovian system would likewise enable tandem microsat missions and tandem science to be performed at Jupiter. There is a great deal of valuable science yet to be accomplished at Jupiter. For instance, the Galileo Entry Probe did not carry a camera or a UV/Visible/NIR spectrometer. Such instruments could revolutionize our understanding of the nature of the clouds and of dynamic atmospheric processes too small to be observed from orbit or hidden beneath the upper cloud decks. A photograph from within the atmosphere of a giant planet is also one of the few remaining relatively easily obtainable "firsts" in our exploration of the solar system. Furthermore, by employing multiple entry probes, several different sites may be sampled. While the spread between probes cannot be too large in order for the communications scheme to be effective, this network approach may avoid one of the pitfalls of the Galileo Mission whose one point of data is thought to correspond to an atypical part of the atmosphere [3]. The Concept: The mission profile concept is illustrated in Fig 1 and is described below. Following launch in November of 2027, a carrier spacecraft with  Figure 1: Javelin Mission Concept Cartoon  several small atmospheric probes enters cruise along a direct trajectory to Jupiter. Prior to in-system arrival in September of 2030, the probes are ejected from the carrier with enough impulse that they intersect the upper atmosphere of Jupiter. Once they hit the top of the atmosphere, these entry probes decelerate using ablative heat shields until they achieve terminal velocity.  At this point the probes begin acquiring scientific measurements and will drop through the atmosphere, reaching the 10-bar level approximately 15 minutes after peak deceleration. Due to the low areal density of the entry vehicles no parachutes are necessary. This reduces complexity while still permitting over 15 minutes of useable science under free-fall from above the 0.45 Bar level to near the 10-Bar level of the Jovian Atmosphere during which up to 20 Mbits of data could be returned per probe, enough for 100 images per probe with a resolution of 256 x 256 pixels ICER compressed to 3 bits per pixel. Each probe may contain a different instrument payload such that the sum of their measurements is greater than what could be achievable with a single entry vehicle.  Meanwhile, the carrier spacecraft continues on a hyperbolic trajectory that approaches within 10,000 km of the 1-bar level of Jupiter. During this mission phase, the carrier and its attached HGA slew to track the probes descending through the atmosphere. Once the probes have failed or the carrier has passed over the local horizon with respect to the probes, the carrier slews to track the JUICE spacecraft and begins downlinking the data received from the probes before departing the Jovian system. JUICE then downlinks this data directly to Earth through the DSN. This concept is enabled by the small mass of the entry probes. Such penetrators, no more than 12.5 kg in mass and 0.6 m across would experience much less heating than previous concepts [4] of much larger (~300kg) spacecraft presented as minimum concepts and would therefore be able to carry a greater portion of their mass as scientific payload. By dividing the payload amongst several penetrators, the risk to the mission is substantially mitigated and may be shared amongst several different stakeholders each producing an independent probe. The entire spacecraft is sufficiently small and modular that upwards of 60 atmospheric entry vehicles could be deployed by a single medium launch. Conclusions: By relaxing the requirement of deep penetration into the jovian atmosphere not only are the environmental conditions under which the probes will operate more benign, but the duration of their fall is sufficiently short that the support carrier may approach Jupiter much more closely. This in turn increases the available data rates and the total data return from the mission. By allowing for a modularity of six entry probes per carrier, several different latitudes can be sampled, vastly increasing our knowledge of Jupiter's atmosphere down to the 10-Bar level. Such a mission could be extremely cost effective, coming in at less than half the cost of a typical NASA discovery mission [5]. Alternatively, the modularity of the mission architecture, with many different independent probes, could allow organizations and governments who currently are priced out of planetary exploration to participate. The cost of a single probe berth could be less than $1 Million USD. [6] References: [1] Selva, D. and Krejci, D. (2012) Acta Astronautica vol. 74 pp. 50-68. [2] Worden, P. (2012) Canadian Space Summit, London, ON [3] Orton, G. et al (1996) Science vol 272 (5263) pp. 839840. [4] e.g.  Balint, T.S. (2005) OPAG Meeting, Boulder CO. [5] NRC (2011) Vision and Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022. [6] Moores et al. (2014) Submitted, Experimental Astronomy.  F ig ur e 2: T op - C ar ri er sp ac ec ra ft w ith si x m ic ro pr ob es .  B el ow - in di vi du al m ic ro pr ob es sh ow in g pa yl oa d an d ba ck sh el l 