1458.PDF
What the MErcury Radiometer and Thermal infrared Imaging Spectrometer (MERTIS) instrument will see on Mercury – creating synthetic data from MESSENGER results.  J. Helbert1, M. D’Amore1, A. Maturilli1, T. Säuberlich2, I. Walter2, G. Peter2, S. Ferrari1, K. Bauch3, and H. Hiesinger3, 1Institute for Planetary Research, DLR, Rutherfordstrasse 2, Berlin, Germany; 2Optical Informationssystems, DLR, Rutherfordstrasse 2, Berlin, Germany; 3Institut für Planetologie, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Wilhelm-Klemm Strasse 10, Münster, Germany. Introduction:  The MErcury Radiometer and Thermal infrared Imaging Spectrometer (MERTIS) is part of the payload of the Mercury Planetary Orbiter spacecraft of the ESA-JAXA BepiColombo mission. MERTIS combines an imaging spectrometer covering the wavelength range from 7-14 µm with a radiometer covering the wavelength range from 7-40 µm [1,2,3,4]. The instrument will map the whole surface of Mercury with a spatial resolution of 500m for the spectrometer channel and 2km for the radiometer channel [e.g., 1].  To exploit the full potential of the unique MERTIS dataset, an extensive calibration campaign has been performed. This includes radiometric, spectral, and geometric calibration. In addition we have performed calibration verification measurement of analog materials at temperatures of up to 500°C - similar to the peak temperatures expected at Mercury - with the MERTIS qualification and flight model in the Planetary Emissivity Laboratory (PEL) at DLR. These measurements allow the evaluation of the MERTIS performance in direct comparison with our Bruker VERTEX 80V laboratory spectrometer. They also enable the creation of synthetic MERTIS datasets. The MERTIS instrument: MERTIS is part of the payload of the BepiColombo Mercury Planetary Orbiter (MPO). The flight model has been successfully integrated on the spacecraft in October 2013 [2]. Figure 1 shows the integrated instrument, with the radiator side of the spacecraft on the left.   Figure 1 MERTIS flight model integrated on the BepiColombo Mercury Planetary Orbiter (MPO) The combination of spectrometer and a radiometer channel using the same optics and calibration sources allows to retrieve emissivity, surface temperature and thermal inertia indepdently [1,3]. Figure 2 shows an simplified overview of the MERTIS data products and their creation pathways.  Figure 2 Overview of the MERTIS data products and their creation From MESSENGER to MERTIS: The MERTIS instrument had been proposed long before the NASA MESSENGER mission [3] provided us with new insights into the innermost of the terrestrial planets. The discoveries of MESSENGER fundamentally changed our view of Mercury. MESSENGER can provide geological information as well as spectral information in the UV, visible and near-infrared wavelengths range [5].  We started creating synthetic MERTIS datasets with realistic in-orbit scenarios using MESSENGER data for the Rudaki area as a baseline. We have selected the Kuiper-Rudaki region, because this region has been extensively covered by measurements from the MESSENGER spacecraft.   Figure 3 Reflectance at 450 nm (normalized at 700nm) as measured by the MASCS instrument on MESSENGER during the primary orbital mission [6]  Recent analyses of observations by the Mercury Atmospheric and Surface Composition Spectrometer (MASCS) instrument on the MESSENGER spacecraft [7] with an unsupervised hierarchical clustering method shows at global scales two major units: a polar spectral unit (PSU) spectrally flat and redder than the equatorial spectral region (ESU). A more detailed study [8] with further clustering shows that the study area belongs to the “core” ESU, and only exhibits small patches of a transitional unit between global ESU and the PSU. MERTIS at PEL: The Mercury simulation chamber at PEL has been equipped with an additional port on top. The MERTIS instrument can now be mounted on the 1458.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
chamber and a KRS-5 window allows viewing directly the sample in the chamber that is heated in a vacuum environement (Fig. 4). Using this setup we obtained spectral measurements with both the MERTIS flight model and the MERTIS qualification model.  Figure 4 MERTIS qualification model on the Mercury simulation chamber at PEL in DLR As discussed in [2] we had to developed a complex operational scenario for MERTIS. During a typical dayside pass the instrument will switch modes at least 10 times. Dwell time, spatial and spectral binning as well as the readout area of the detector are adjusted to optimize the signal-to-noise ratio while minimizing the returned data volume. To facilitate later data analysis we have operated MERTIS at PEL in all modes that will be used during the different orbital phases during different phases of the Mercury year [2,3]. Figure 5 shows MERTIS spectra for a quartz sample obtained with high spectral binning.   Figure 5 Preliminary results obtained with MERTIS QM for a quartz sample at 400°C (red), 200°C (orange) and 100°C (blue) in comparison with laboratory spectrum (black) MERTIS data processing and distribution: We are currently setting up the automated MERTIS data processing and distribution pipeline (Fig. 6). This pipeline will perform all necessary steps from telemetry data to radiometrically and geometrically calibrated data in PDS 4 format and distribute it to the team.  Figure 6 MERTIS data processing and distribution architecture Assuming a set of several potential mineralogies for a study area and modeled surface temperatures at different local times we can now create synthetic MERTIS data. Figure 7 shows a first example. This data is used to test the data processing and distribution architecture.  Figure 7 Synthetic MERTIS data at 8.9 µm - spatial resolution is 10km in comparions to 500m for the real MERTIS data Conclusions: Despite all the new MESSENGER results, the MERTIS dataset remains unique and is now more important than ever. None of the instruments on the NASA MESSENGER mission covers the same spectral range or provides a measurement of the surface temperature. MERTIS will complement the results of MESSENGER. MERTIS will for example be able to provide spatially resolved compositional information on the hollows and pyroclastic deposits – both among the most exciting discoveries by the MESSENGER mission for which the NASA mission can not provide compositional information References: [1] H. Hiesinger and J. Helbert (2010) PSS, 58, 144–165. [2] Hiesinger et al (2014) LPSC this meeting [3] Helbert, J. et al. (2010) SPIE, p. 78080J–78080J–13 [4] Walter, I. (2011) SPIE, p. 81540Y–81540Y–14. [5] Solomon, S.C. et al. (2001) PSS, 49(14-15), 1445–1465 [6] Izenberg, N.R. et al. (2014) 228, 364–374. [7] Helbert, J. et al, JGR, submitted. [8] D’Amore et al. (2013) EPSC 426  Acknowledgement: We are deeply grateful  to the MESSENGER team for providing excellent data that has helped us in the MERTIS development and will help us in operation and data processing 1458.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
