1460.PDF
WHAT ATTRIBUTES RELATED TO SAMPLE QUALITY WOULD BE REQUIRED TO ACHIEVE THE SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVES OF MARS SAMPLE RETURN (MSR)?  Yang Liu1, Dave W. Beaty1, Deborah S. Bass1, Richard L. Mattingly1. 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA. (Email: yang.liu@jpl.nasa.gov).  Introduction: If scientifically selected geological samples are going to be sent from Mars to Earth, it would likely happen as a result of the combined results of multiple missions over an as-yet unknown time span. The proposed Mars 2020 rover may represent a first critical step [1], as it will be designed to select and cache samples on Mars, and it is assumed that these samples will be considered for Earth return. In order for the MSR enterprise to be able to achieve its scientific objectives, it is necessary that the samples have a certain minimum state of quality at the time they are received by the sample analysts in terrestrial laboratories. Such quality factors would be affected by each mission that interacts with the samples, beginning with the proposed Mars 2020 sample caching rover. However, the relative priority and specific character of the different sample quality factors have not been defined previously. Early definition can have a significant impact to mission design decisions and engineering investments. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to evaluate the effects of these factors on science investigations relative to the overall science goals of MSR. Such an exercise would contribute to the definition of mission-specific requirements to mitigate degradation of sample quality. For this purpose, we have evaluated the set of measurements central to addressing the science goals outlined in [2], and developed a list of possible factors that may affect sample qualities. Previous reports from various science analysis groups (e.g., [1-4]) formed the basis and provided guidelines for our activity.  A primary purpose of this abstract/presentation is to catalyze community discussion on this topic before the high-level requirements for the proposed Mars 2020 mission are finalized.  Factors affecting the science value of returned samples:  Considering the entire set of returned sample science investigations [2-4], we have tentatively identified 12 sample quality factors, which can be organized into 6 broader groups. Each factor would affect the scientific value of returned samples. 1. Mechanical Integrity refers to 1a) fractures in the sample and 1b) the relative movement of broken pieces. Several high priority investigations (e.g., biosignature recognition and surface processes involving water) are dependent on investigating rock fragments large enough to display the rock's texture and the relationship of the individual grains to each other. The damage from fracturing can be partially mitigated if the fragments do not move relative to one another. Therefore, both fracture density and relative movement of fragments are important attributes for the collected sample.   2. Earth-sourced Contamination may compromise the high priority investigations such as biosignature and planetary evolution of Mars. Earth sourced contamination involves: 2a) Organic contamination. Whether life was ever present on Mars entails correctly interpreting the amount and type of Mars-sourced organics. Earth sourced organic contamination may be introduced by hardware or hydrazine fuel in the landing system. 2b) Inorganic contamination. Materials used for drilling, sample capsules and seals may introduce elements (Rb, Sr, W, highly siderophile elements) that affect the interpretation of results for the planetary evolution of Mars. 2c) Biological contamination. Whole cells or fragments of cells from Earth-sourced biology could lead to false positive of life detection. A critical investigation entails correctly interpreting the amount and type of Mars-sourced life forms.  The risk to science interpretation from these contaminants can be mitigated through proper documentation of flight hardware and materials plus the inclusion of “blank” samples in the caching mission.  3. Heating and History. Heating to temperatures significantly above the present-day maximum martian surface temperature may affect two classes of investigations: studies of martian organic molecules (e.g., alphatic hydrocarbons), and studies of minerals stable under martian conditions (e.g., MgSO4·11H2O) [2-3]. However, the heating duration is also important since kinetic effects are important at low-T.     4. Sample Gain/Loss refers to change to a sample that is encapsulated in a container.  4a) Volatile gain or loss. The volatile components of solid samples may include H2O in several different forms, trapped liquid or gaseous inclusions, and/or trapped atmospheric gases (mainly CO2). Volatile loss from a sealed container may affect the molecular and isotopic composition of the trace gases. Equally important, if volatiles leak into a sample 1460.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
container, either from an adjacent volatile-rich sample, or from the Earth’s atmosphere after landing on Earth, it can result in significant misinterpretations.  4b) Exchange with non-Mars environments may reduce the scientific value of samples so that they would no longer adequately represent the conditions on Mars. Processes include, but are not limited to, oxidation/reduction, dehydration/hydration, and surface chemistry of grains. 4c) Cross contamination between samples refers to residual material in the sampling system from a previous sample ending up in a subsequent sample. The planned high priority investigations are not highly sensitive to this sort of contamination, so it would appear that requirements in this area do not need to be strict. 4d) Mechanical Fractionation: Loss of fines refers to loss of samples during sample collection/encapsulation and sample handling. Given the astrobiology objectives of the mission, heterogeneous rocks would be certainly targeted. Often the samples with highest scientific value in astrobiological investigations consist of multilayered samples with varying mechanical properties (e.g. a layer or a vein of soft materials). Missing materials from this portion of the sample could lead to inaccurate interpretations. Thus, ensuring recovery of a large portion of the intended sample is crucial for biosignature and habitat investigations. This can happen in any sample transfer step, and is a form of mechanical fractionation. Some anticipated investigations (e.g. measuring the toxicity of martian regolith for future human exploration) are sensitive to these fines.   5. Radiation History. Radiation (proton, neutron, gamma-ray) can kill microorganisms, and affect electron shells (color change and thermoluminescence properties [5]), and neutron radiation may possibly change some isotope ratios (e.g., INAA utilizes neutron radiation to produce specific isotope of elements for chemical analysis). Once out of the ground, samples may experience enhanced natural radiation. Fortunately, the natural radiation environment on martian surface (0.21 mGy/day = ~0.76 Gy for 10 yr) and in the space (0.48 mGy/day = 1.75 Gy for 10 years) are very low [6-7]. However, if a radioisotope generator is used as energy source at any point in the MSR campaign, the samples may receive substantially higher radiation doses. Calculations are in progress regarding the quantity and type of radiation that can affect the scientific value.     Figure 1. Draft evaluation matrix of sample quality factors. The x-axis shows the priority of the science investigations, and the y-axis shows the impact of the quality factor on the science investigation.  6. Magnetization History. Magnetic properties of martian rocks may contain information about planetary core formation/evolution. The current magnetic field on Mars is essentially zero. Since the samples would end up on Earth, there is little point worrying about fields of this strength or lower. However, artificial fields (electric motors, X-ray radiation) associated with the missions, may impart false magnetic signals, particular if oxidation/reduction occurred in the samples.    Potential Impacts of Quality Factors on Science Goals: Because each factor impacts different science investigations, we evaluated the effects based on the priority of science investigation that it impacts (Fig. 1). For example, organic contamination may potentially cause false positive for biosignature detection, which is the 1st priority science investigation defined by the MSR End-to-End international Science Analysis Group (E2E-iSAG [2]). Thus, if the organic contamination occurred, its potential effects on science investigation is high (top row), and the science investigation it affected is the high priority ones (right most column).  The draft relative importance of these factors to the scientific values of the returned samples is shown in decreasing order from red to purple to orange and yellow. Those of high impacts (red and purple colored cells) require careful considerations to ensure they have minimum impacts on the scientific values. Community input on the draft relationships shown in Fig. 1 is welcome.  References: [1] Mars 2020 SDT (2013). MEPAG. [2] McLennan, S.M. et al. (2011). Astrobiology 12: 175-230. [3] Borg, L.E. et al. (2008) Astrobiology 8: 489-535. [4] MacPherson, G. J., et al. (2001) ND-SAG Appendix III. MEPAG. [5] Allen C. C. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 2704327066. [6] Zeitlin C. et al. (2013) Science, 340, 1080-1084. [7] Hassler D. M. et al. (2013) Science.  1460.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
