1478.PDF
Mission Concept Designer’s Guide to the Radioisotope Power Systems Reference Book.  Young H. Lee1, June  F. Zakrajsek2, Brian K. Bairstow1, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA, 91109 (young.h.lee@jpl.nasa.gov), 2NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Road, Cleveland, OH 44135 (june.f.zakrajsek@nasa.gov)   Introduction:  For more than five decades, Radioisotope Power Systems (RPS) have played a critical role in the exploration of space, enabling missions of scientific discovery to destinations across the solar system by providing electrical power to explore remote and challenging environments - some of the hardest to reach, darkest, and coldest locations in the solar system. The recently reissued National Space Policy of the United States (June 2010) directs that “The United States shall develop and use space nuclear power systems where such systems safely enable or significantly enhance space exploration or operational capabilities”[1].  Moreover, the National Research Council report “Radioisotope Power Systems: An Imperative for Maintaining U.S. Leadership in Space Exploration” (2009) by the Radioisotope Power Systems Committee illustrates how important RPS availability is for reaching the outer solar system where sunlight is very faint [2]. RPS could enable many deep space missions where increased heliocentric distances reduce the ability of solar power to adequately meet spacecraft and instruments requirements. In particular, RPS could meet the demand of many long-duration mission concepts for continuous power to conduct science investigations independent of change in sunlight or variations in surface conditions like shadows, thick cloud or dust. Some previous notable missions that were enabled by RPS include Nimbus III, the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package, the Pioneers 10 and 11, the Viking Mars Landers, Galileo, and Ulysses. The current operating set of missions that are enabled by RPS are Voyagers 1 and 2, Cassini, New Horizons, and Curiosity. Radioisotope Power Systems Program office: The RPS Program Office was formulated in July 2009 as a multi-center, multi-agency (with the Department of Energy) program whose purpose is to manage the NASA Science Mission  Directorate’s (SMD) investments in RPS and their potential utilization in future missions. The majority of missions that could use RPS are formulated and implemented by the Planetary Science Division within the SMD. One of the key Program requirements is to support potential users of RPS with expertise and explanation of RPS capabilities to allow these users to understand and evaluate the use of RPS for their proposed applications.   Figure 1 shows the historical, current and potential RPS for mission formulation use.  Figure 1 – RPS Power Ranges RPS Systems Reference Book:  To (1) facilitiate mission concept development and identification of RPS implementation trades by mission design teams, and to (2) assist RPS Mission Analysis, NASA mission engineers, and concurrent engineering centers for RPS use in early mission formulation, the RPS Systems Reference Book documents the specifications and capabilities that are and will be available from the RPS and the associated timeline of development and its availability for flight. It contains briefings on RPS and their technologies. RPS are described with regards to:  Performance and General Characteristic: This section provides a brief history of the power system, discussion of applications and heritage, and a table of parameters including mass, power, efficiency, and system lifetime.  This information should help mission designers learn about past mission usage or development status and quickly provide a basic understanding of RPS applicability to a particular mission of their interest. Power Conversion Technology: A description of power conversion method, type and number of power conversion engines or thermocouples, and degradation rate is provided.  This is intended to give background on the physics and heritage of the particular conversion process used by the system.  The RPS Systems Reference Book primarily focuses on various thermoelectric and Stirling RPS. Configuration: A description of dimensions, material composition, internal configuration, and mass breakdown is provided facilitating the mission designers to better understand spacecraft integration and 1478.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
compatibility as well as background on internal heat transfer and load pathways. System Considerations: This section catalogs potential impacts of the RPS on a spacecraft and details the process for installation of the RPS before launch.  The RPS installation process should be considered early in the spacecraft design process, as installation is done while the spacecraft is within the launch vehicle faring and access could be difficult. Mechanical Compliance: A explanation of RPS load tolerance and the level of vibration produced, which are respectively important for determining compatibility with high g-loads and sensitive instruments, are provided. Thermal Compliance:  A description of thermal requirements and of quantity and temperature of waste heat produced is provided.  Waste heat is a significant byproduct of plutonium dioxide-based power, and varies based on power level and conversion technique.  In some environments (e.g. outer planets) waste heat is beneficial for spacecraft survival, while on other environments (e.g. inside an aeroshell) rejection of waste heat can be a complicating factor. Fault Modes:  A description of possible failures and how they could impact operation and power production is provided to aid mission designers in making decisions regarding risk posture and inclusion of redundant units. Schedule: For current systems, this section describes system availability and the production line.  For future systems, this section describes the current technology readiness level, necessary development milestones, and expected availability date.  This gives information on whether a system is expected to be available for use on a potential mission, and whether there is likely to be a sufficient quantity for missions that would use multiple units.  To some extent, these schedules and production quantities can be negotiable given technology development funding or a RPS Program response to specific mission demand.  References: [1] National Space Policy of the United States of America, June 28, 2010, Page 8, [2] NRC ‘RPS:  An Imperative for Maintaining U.S. Leadership in Space Exploration:  http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12653  1478.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
