 THE INFLUENCE OF THE TEXTURAL PROPERTIES OF IRON OXIDES ON THEIR VISIBLE TO NEAR INFRARED SPECTRA AND APPLICATIONS TO MARS.  A. A. Fraeman 1, R. E. Arvidson 1, B. L. Jolliff 1, and R. V. Morris 2, 1 Washington University in St. Louis (1 Brookings Drive, Campus Box 1169, St. Louis, MO 63130, email: afraeman@wustl.edu), 2 NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX.  Introduction: One of the key science targets for the Curiosity Mars rover when it reaches Mt. Sharp is a hematite-bearing ridge located ~2.5 km north of the mound's base. The hematite deposit was discovered and mapped using spatially sharpened orbital spectral data collected by the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) [1].  The formation mechanism for this deposit is uncertain, although it is predicted to have formed either when Fe 2+ transported by anoxic waters encountered an oxidizing environment and precipitated relatively insoluble Fe 3+ minerals, or through local leaching of Fe 2+ bearing materials by neutral to slightly acidic waters [1]. Detailed in situ textural measurements will be a necessary component to resolve which of these formation mechanisms is more likely, but both formation scenarios present the hematite as an attractive candidate for a previously habitable environment.  The erosion-resistant nature of the ridge suggests that hematite contained in it is present as either a cement or coating.  The spectral properties of materials with these textures are poorly replicated using the radiative transfer techniques most commonly used to model the spectra of planetary materials [2, 3].  A combination of laboratory investigations and an improvement in the ability to model materials having these textures will be necessary to generate a selfconsistent model between orbital and in situ data when Curiosity reaches the hematite ridge.  Here, we examine a unique set of well-characterized samples of hematite- and other iron oxide-bearing rocks that represent likely textural endmembers for the hematite in the ridge. These analyses are used to test the applicability of current radiative transfer models to possible ridgelike materials, and also to begin developing the next generation of more versatile spectral models, i.e. modeling grains as discrete dipole ensembles. Experimental samples:  We have compiled a collection of rocks containing hematite and other iron oxides and hydroxides that are representative of the textural endmembers likely present in the hematite ridge (Fig. 1).  These samples include red- and specular-hematite from San Bernardino, CA and Marquette County, MI, respectively, as well as hematite beads, similar in size to the spherules found by Opportunity in Meridiani Planum.   Iron oxides as cement are represented by sandstones from the Cambrian Lamotte Formation and Ordovician Roubidoux Formation, both located in Missouri.   Although the felsic precursors of Figure 1: Images of iron oxide samples representing possible textural endmembers for hematite-bearing ridge.  Columns from left to right show increasing magnification on the samples   these sandstones are not representative of martian materials, the alluvial environment in which the Lamotte sandstone formed is similar to conditions inferred to have operated in the plains of Gale Crater [4].  Iron oxide and oxyhydroxides in the form of coatings are represented by river rocks from the Berrocal section of Rio Tinto, and desert varnish covering basaltic clasts from the Cima Volcanic field in Mojave, CA.  Detailed  chemical and textural analyses of these samples collected using laboratory methods such as SEM and XRD will be presented. Radiative transfer modeling:  The visible to near infrared spectral properties of planetary materials are heavily influenced by their physical textures, including grain size or the presence of optically thick coatings.  Bidirectional reflectance spectra from 0.4 - 2.5 μm of the samples were collected using an ASD portable spectrometer.  In all cases, these spectra showed absorptions diagnostic of iron oxides as well as additional hydrated and hydroxylated materials (Fig. 2). We investigate the limitations of Hapke [2] and Shkuratov [3] radiative transfer methods to accurately model the spectra collected from these samples.  These popular modeling techniques for estimating mineral abundances are based on geometric optical approximations that require assumptions about the behavior of multiple scattering between particles.  Because of these approximations, the models are known to be inaccurate when particle sizes approach the size of wavelengths and when particles are closely packed.  However, a large number of planetary materials, including the iron oxide samples studied here, are known to violate these constraints (Fig. 3).    Figure 3: Cartoon representing textures found in planetary materials.  Left: When the diameter of particles (D) >> wavelength of light (λ), the particles act independently from one another and "checkerboard" linear mixing models are appropriate for abundance estimation.  Center: When D> λ, the material is in the realm of geometric options for which traditional radiative transfer modeling has been shown to work.  Right: When D ~ λ such as in coatings and closely packed mixtures, current models break down and new methods will be necessary.  In contrast to the geometric optics model, we are also investigating the applicability to these samples of a new model that has been developed by the optical community and that is based on a discrete-dipole approximation (DDA) [5].  In this model, targets are represented as a lattice of polarizable dipoles that can have sizes smaller than the relevant light wavelengths and therefore are not subject to the same limitations as the geometrical optical models.  This model, although still in development, is promising for application to these types of problems and will be applied to modeling spectral properties of the textural endmembers presented in Fig. 2.  Figure 2: ASD spectra from rock samples.  Many of the spectra show absorptions indicative of hematite or other iron oxides (i.e. goethite), indicated by heavy dotted lines.  The rock samples show evidence for additional hydrated and hydroxylated phases present (i.e. phyllosilicates) indicated by light gray dotted lines.  References: [1] Fraeman, et al, Geology, (2013), 41, 1103. [2] Hapke, 1993, Cambridge University Press [3] Shkuratov et al., 1999, Icarus, 137 [4] Williams et al, Science, (2013), 340, 6136 [5] Purcell & Pennypacker, 1973, ApJ, 186. 