1506.PDF
USING MAPPING-DERIVED QUANTITATIVE STRAIN ESTIMATES TO TEST UPLIFT VERSUS DIKE EMPLACEMENT MODELS FOR GIANT RADIAL LINEAMENT SYSTEM FORMATION ON VENUS. E.B. Grosfils1, J.A. Albright1, J. Baxter1,3, P.C. Ferrin1 and P.J. McGovern2, 1Pomona College, Claremont, CA (egrosfils@pomona.edu), 2Lunar & Planetary Institute, Houston, TX, 3Univ. of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.   Introduction:  Over 150 giant radial lineament systems characterized by extensional structures were first identified on Venus via a C1-MIDR resolution (225 m/pix) reconnaisance survey [1], and dedicated mapping efforts at FMIDR resolution (75 m/pix) continue to identify new examples [e.g. 2,3]. On geomorphological grounds many radial systems (~3/4) appear to require shallow dike emplacement, with the remainder more plausibly related to domical uplift or a combination of the two mechanisms [1]. The presence of radial dikes has also been inferred from recent quantitative evaluations where fault offsets at large apical grabens permit direct hoop strain calculation [4,5]; however, most radial linement systems are dominated by extensional structures only 1-2 pixels wide for which direct fault offset measurement is not possible. To address this limitation, here we use Becuma Mons (34N, 22E; radius ~75 km [6]) to demonstrate a new mapping-derived technique that can be used to evaluate hoop strain at radially fractured systems. By incorporating narrow extensional structures that dominate the structural deformation at most giant radial lineament systems, our technique augments existing quantitative methods and can provide important new insight into the origin of systems where efforts were previously restricted to geomorphological analysis alone. Methods & Results:  FMIDR Magellan backscatter data imported into ArcGIS were used to map the radial lineament system centered upon Becuma Mons (Fig. 1); co-registered topography data were used to create a profile depicting mean edifice elevation as a function of distance r from the center of the edifice (Fig. 2). The bulk of the lineaments lie within 100 km of the radial focus, an extent only slightly greater than that of the edifice, and lineament-affiliated volcanism is not abundant. As a result, the origin of the radial lineament system is ambiguous [1]. To resolve this ambiguity we compare model predictions of hoop strain, which assume the edifice topography is produced solely by uplift, with calculations derived from mapped lineaments (the strain/lineament is a variable). Using an axisymmetric elastic finite element model in COMSOL Multiphysics we simulate the mean Becuma Mons topography profile through uplift of an originally horizontal surface (Fig. 2). This uplift generates extensional hoop strain at the surface, and Mohr Coulomb failure yielding radial normal faults occurs out to distances of ~100 km, in agreement with mapping observations. To constrain the existing radial deformation we employ strain values ranging from 5-100%; since most of the mapped structures are ~1 pixel wide, this translates to a range of ~4-75 meters of opening per lineament. A 75 m wide tension crack is the practical maximum limit for the dilational strain/lineament. The minimum value must generate sufficient surface deformation to create the (relatively) higher radar backscatter defining each mapped radial lineament, but in the absence of firm constraints the 5% value employed here derives from measurements of surface strain, dominated by normal faults and tension fractures, across narrow zones of extension on Earth (e.g., in Iceland [7,8]). Calculating the hoop strain recorded by the lineaments at any given radial distance from the apex of the Becuma Mons edifice then simply requires multiplying an assumed strain/lineament by the number of lineaments that occur at that distance, then dividing by the original corresponding circumference (2πr). The resulting strain profile range overlaps the hoop strain produced by uplift, with approximately 10% strain/lineament matching the model data (Fig. 3). Discussion:  To maximize the potential for explaining radial deformation without invoking subsurface dike emplacement—our goal is to test whether dike injection is required—we have assumed that all of the topography at Becuma Mons is a product of uplift (Fig. 2); however, this is unlikely since volcanic edifice topography is generally a product of surface eruption and construction as well. The hoop strain reported in Figure 3 thus indicates an approximate maximum expected value from uplift at Becuma Mons.  In contrast, the mapping-derived hoop strain calculations reported in Figure 3 are likely conservative. First, if an otherwise continuous lineament is briefly discontinuous where a black annulus in Figure 1 crosses it, it would fail to be counted; use of small (~1 km) buffers that thicken the annulus used to count lineament intersections mitigates this mapping problem, and strains become ~120% of the values reported in Figure 3. Second, we assume the mapped lineaments are the only ones that formed, even though in many cases (not Becuma Mons; [6]) existing lineaments can clearly be obscured by subsequent volcanism [1,6]. In such a circumstance, we would fail to map and hence would 1506.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
fail to include hoop strain that actually occurred. Third, in some systems large apical grabens accommodate significant strain not included in our analysis; at Becuma Mons, for example, 4-8 large grabens produced as much strain (~4% [4]) as the entire system of narrow lineaments if a value of 100% strain/lineament is assumed. The results reported in Figure 3 thus minimize the hoop strain derived from the mapped radial lineaments at Becuma Mons, and use of this method—ignoring discontinuities, ignoring volcanic burial, ignoring contributions from large grabens—will ensure that estimates of hoop strain from mapped radial lineaments remain as conservative as possible. By optimizing the case against dike injection, the strain comparison technique demonstrated here provides a fairly robust test for whether lateral dikes are indeed required to explain observed surface deformation. For Becuma Mons, only when hoop strain resulting from uplift is maximized, and that calculated using mapped lineaments is minimized, does it become possible for the deformation observed at Becuma Mons to result solely from uplift. Barring this combination of circumstances, uplift alone is insufficient to explain the observed deformation, and we infer that shallow lateral dike injection is likely required. The smaller the percentage of the existing topography explained by construction rather than uplift, and the greater the strain/lineament, the more lateral dike injection is required to generate the observed structural deformation.   Figure 1. Becuma Mons, Venus, with color topography (red high, blue low) over Magellan backscatter data. Radial lineaments mapped in white; annuli used for strain and topography calculations shown in black.  Figure 2. Becuma Mons topography. Points depict mean elevation data for the annuli in Fig. 1, with outermost annulus value defined as the background elevation above which the volcano rises. Red line is FEM-derived model of the topography resulting from subsurface uplift of an initially horizontal surface.  Figure 3. Model- and map-derived hoop strain at Becuma Mons. Red line is strain from uplift model in Fig. 2; Mohr Coulomb failure produces radial normal faulting for r < 97 km. Black lines depict strain assuming 15% (11 m) and 100% (75 m) strain per radial lineament intersecting a given annulus from Fig. 1.  References: [1] Grosfils, E.B. and Head, J.W. (1994), GRL, 21, 701-704. [2] Ernst, R.E et al. (2003), Icarus, 164, 282-316. [3] Studd, D. et al. (2011), Icarus, 215, 279-291. [4] Grindrod, P.M. et al. (2005), JGR, 110, E12002. [5] McGovern, P.J. et al (2014), Geology, 42, 59-62. [6] Krassilnikov, A.S. and Head, J.W. (2003), JGR, 108, E95108. [7] Forslund, T. and Gudmundsson, A. (1991), JSG, 13, 433-457. [8] Forslund, T. and Gudmundsson, A. (1992), Tectonics, 11, 57-68. 1506.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
