1521.PDF
ALTERATION OF OLIVINE-RICH BASALTS ON MARS: A THEMIS/CRISM JOINT INVESTIGATION. E. S. Amador1, N. H. Thomas1,  and J. L. Bandfield2, 1Earth and Space Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 98195-1310 (esamador@u.washington.edu), 2Space Science Institute.Introduction: Much of Mars exploration is driven by the search for geochemical environments that may have once been hospitable to microbial life. With such a goal in mind, the search for mineralogical evidence of  serpentinization reactions is  a reasonable  place to start. Olivine-rich basalts would have been a favorable protolith for such reactions, given that serpentinization in  its  general  form is  the  hydration  of  olivine.  The reaction produces  serpentine,  magnetite,  brucite,  and H2 [e.g.,  1].  Other  minerals  often  associated  with serpentine include talc, saponite, and carbonate.Here we  investigate  regions with elevated olivine content as  identified  by thermal-infrared (~6-15  μm) multispectral  data  and  document  the  spatial  and mineralogical  relationships  between  bulk  surface composition  and  hydrated  or  altered  mineralogy  as observed using near-infrared (~1-3 μm) spectral data. Our  study  has  two  goals:  1)  To  systematically describe the bulk mineralogy and associated hydrated phases in regions with olivine-rich basalts across Mars; and 2) to place those results into context with respect to  the  well-characterized  and  better  understood framework  of  olivine-rich  basalts  and  associated alteration products in Nili Fossae. The identification of serpentine and related phases is a particular focus of our  study as  their  presence  would  indicate  a  unique environment with the ability to support microbial life.Data &  Methods: We will primarily corroborate complementary  spectral  wavelength  datasets,  each with  unique  capabilities.  We  can determine  bulk surface  composition  using  thermal-infrared  spectral data  from  the  Thermal  Emission  Imaging  System (THEMIS;  100  m/pixel),  and  where  available,  the higher  spectral  resolution  Thermal  Emission Spectrometer data  (TES;  3×6  km  spatial  sampling). Near-infrared  hyperspectral  data  from  the  Compact Reconnaissance  Imaging  Spectrometer  for  Mars (CRISM; >18 m/pixel) is used to identify the presence of  Fe-mineralogy  and  hydrated  minerals.  For  this work,  we use both established  and newly developed spectral  and  image  analysis  techniques  that  have previously been implemented for investigations in Nili Fossae [2, 3].Starting with a global map of olivine-rich locations (Fig. 1), we have selected a series of priority locations for detailed investigation that include the southern rim of Isidis Basin, the northeast rim of Argyre Basin, and eastern portions of Valles  Marineris. Here we present southern  Isidis  Basin  as  an  example  of  the investigation and methodology.Thermal-infrared data processing and analysis. We apply several analysis techniques to the THEMIS data; decorrelation stretch (DCS) image products [4] are first used  as  preliminary  survey  tools  to  obtain  a  broad understanding  of  the  variability  in  bulk  rock composition in the region. Similarly, 'center of gravity' index  maps  are  produced  and  used  to  infer  the variability in bulk SiO2 abundance [5, 6]. Based on the regions  of  interest  identified using the  broad  survey data products, a more detailed analysis is conducted of surface emissivity spectra from individual locations. Figure 1. White polygons indicate locations of potential olivine-rich basalts identified by THEMIS multispectral DCS data. Black boxes indicate the first three priority sites for this study. 1521.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Near-infrared data processing and  analysis. CRISM data are corrected for atmospheric  gas  absorptions  using methods  described  in  McGuire  et  al.  (2009) [7].  Spectral  indices  are constructed  in  a  manner  similar  to Pelkey  et  al.,  (2007)  [8]  in  order  to quickly  determine  the  general  spatial context  for  specific  mineral  phases present.  The individual  I/F  spectra,  as well  as  spectral  ratios,  are also examined  to  confirm  the  presence  or absence of a specific phase.Near-infrared  data  is  further analyzed  using  target  transformation and factor analysis techniques to better identify  the  specific  phases  present  [9].  These techniques  are  effective  in  detecting  weak  spectral signatures  as  it  takes  advantage  of  the  statistical information  present  in  the  spectral  variability throughout the entire image. This technique has been successful in detecting phases that may have otherwise been missed using standard spectral indices or ratios. It has also been successfully automated to allow for rapid analysis of hundreds of CRISM images.Preliminary Isidis Basin Results: Figure 2 shows initial mapping  of  olivine-rich  basalts  along  the southern  rim  of  Isidis  Basin.  Analysis  of  thermalinfrared surface emissivity data indicate two primary bulk  rock compositions:  an  olivine-rich  and  olivinepoor basalt.Initial target transformation analysis of 10 CRISM images  in  the  southern  Isidis  region  shows  two potential candidates for serpentine detections (Fig. 2) [9].  The  target  transformation  fit  for  the  candidate serpentine  matches  show  similar  spectral  shape  to more  confident  serpentine  matches  in  Nili  Fossae albeit  with more noise [9].  Further  detections in  the area may increase our confidence in  the presence of regional serpentine-bearing surfaces.Southern Isidis  CRISM data analyzed thus far do not show spectral signatures of talc or saponite though Ehlmann et al., (2008) [10] presents evidence of Mgcarbonate  similar  to  that  in  Nili  Fossae.  Further analysis of CRISM data will provide better constraints on the phyllosilicate phases present.The putative serpentine-bearing surfaces are within 50 km of the olivine-rich basalts, similar to the spatial relationships  between  olivine-rich  basalt  and serpentine-bearing basalt in the Nili Fossae region. Discussion: The  results  of  this  investigation  will help determine the extent of serpentinization across the planet.  The presence  or  absence  of  serpentine  (and associated phases) may allow us to further limit what factors, beyond protolith, control the formation of such habitable environments.The  identification  of  serpentine  phases  globally associated  with  regional  olivine-rich  basalts  would indicate that serpentinization was a significant process during  Mars' history.  Furthermore,  it  would  identify locations on  the planet with a high potential for past habitability  and  biosignature  preservation  -  factors which will help inform landing site selection for future landers and rovers.Alternatively, if we find that Nili Fossae is one of a few locations with serpentine phases, it may indicate that  an  olivine-bearing  bedrock  alone  does  not facilitate or sustain serpentinization  on Mars. We can then begin to hypothesize additional conditions which may have promoted such alteration. For example, Nili Fossae's tectonically active and fractured nature, and/or its vicinity to large impact and volcanic structures, may have  helped  drive  fluid  circulation  and  sustained aqueous  alteration  of  the  bedrock. The  detailed  and systematic characterization of olivine-rich bedrock will therefore  provide  new insight  into  the  nature  of  the paleoenvironments on Mars. References: [1] Ehlmann et al. (2010) GRL, 37, L06201.[2] Amador et al. (2012) LPSC XLIII #2508. [3] Thomas and Bandfield  (2013)  LPSC XLIV  #1325.  [4]  Gillespie  et  al. (1986)  Remot.  Sens.  Envr., 20,  209-235.  [5]  Smith  et  al. (2013)  Icarus, 223, 2, 633-648.  [6] Amador and Bandfield, in  prep. [7]  McGuire et  al.  (2009)  Planet. Space Sci.,  57, 809-815.  [8]  Pelkey  et  al.  (2007)  JGR,  112,  E08S14.  [9] Thomas et al.(2014) LPSC XLV. [10] Ehlmann et al. (2008) Science, 322,  1828-1832.Figure 2. White polygons indicate olivine-rich basalt identified by THEMIS images. Gray footprints indicate CRISM image locations. Magenta boxes show locations of candidate serpentine identifications [9].1521.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
