 A COMET botics, Hou dena, CA CA, wwjam Introd from terres ing surveil craft leadin craft. How exploration ies back to ries.  The based labo of those bo origin, evo as a whole a cometary controlled transportin (ERV).   A conc to a comet has been d surface of cally seale face to del This Come sized to a larger spac takes adva craft system flight-qual ultimately overall sys various co rent probe wide. Descen a comet of craft (RIS RISC will face prop Once the s ing site wi for the pro the approp RISC, orie maneuveri that it will gravity. Th et for seve comet's su longitudina relative ve T SURFACE uston, TX, chu 91103, indyk mes@v-infinity uction: Studie strial telescopic llance perform ng to in-situ ob wever, the ulti n is the deliver o the Earth for study of come oratory will rev odies as well a olution and cur e. The most sig y surface samp manner, extra ng the sample cept for a smal t on a larger co designed. This a comet, retai ed canister, and liver the sampl et Surface Sam llow multiple cecraft for redu antage of man ms, forming a ified subsyste reduce the cos stem, potentia mmercial and size is approx nt and Impact f interest by a C).  After es determine the erties using surface mappin ill be chosen f be's descent tr priate time the ent itself for th ng thrusters to descend unde he probe will th eral hours.  W urface it will re al axis is alig elocity vector i SAMPLE RE u@honeybeero @honeybeerob y-research.com es of comets h c observations, med by flyby or bservations from imate goal for ry of samples r study in terr et surface samp volutionize ou as refine our kn rrent state of t gnificant challe ple is acquiring acting it from t to an Earth ll scale spacec onventionally s s small spacecr ns a sample w d ascends from le to an Earth mple Return Pr probes to tra undancy purpos ny existing sm modular desig ems. This me st and developm ally increasing NASA applic ximately 73 cm t: The CSSRP Robotic Interp stablishing itse e comet's size, remote sensin ng has been co for the CSSRP rajectory will b e probe will d he descent ope o reduce its orb er the influence hen free fall do When the probe orient itself so gned with the n such a way ETURN PROB obotics.com, 2H botics.com, za m. have progresse , to remote sen r orbiting spac m landed spac r celestial bod from those bod restrial laborato ples in an Ear ur understandin nowledge of th the solar syste enge in returnin g the sample in the surface, an Return Vehic craft, transporte sized spacecraf raft impacts th within a hermet m the comet su Return Vehicl robe (CSSRP) avel on a sing ses. The CSSR mall-scale spac n made of man ethodology wi ment time of th the appeal fo ations. The cu m tall by 96 c is transported planetary Spac elf in orbit th , shape and su ng instrument ompleted a land P and the detai be calculated. A detach from th eration, and u bital velocity s e of the comet own to the com is closer to th that the probe e comet surfac that it is norm BE. P. Chu1, S Honeybee Robo acny@honeybe ed nseedy dorth ng he m ng n a nd cle ed ft, he tiurle. is gle RP eny ill he for urm to ehe urts.  dils At he se so t's mhe e's ce mal to the oriente nal ax acts to sition a caniste and Fi Figure Figure Up driven the co in Figu during penetr comet. tion of attache during Sampl the aug per pa nism. into th taining S. Indyk2, K. Z otics, 398 W. W eerobotics.com comet's surfa ed for impact, xis using its att o stabilize the C auger will driv er. The CSSRP igure 2. e 1: Comet Su e 2: CSSRP C pon impact, th n into the come met materials ure 3. Due to g its descent, ration act to ef . Exterior foot f the probe. Th ed to the pare g descent. Im ling Probe uses ger and casing art of the prob When the Aug he upper segme g tension on th Zacny2, W. Jam Washington Bl m, 3V-Infinity R ace on impact it can spin up titude control CSSRP insurin ve comet samp P is illustrated a urface Sample Cross Section he sampling a et's surface wh into a sample the spin stabil the combinat ffectively screw pads help to p hese foot pads ent spacecraft, mmediately fol s a cable winc g out of the co be, known as ger and Casin ent, a spring is he cable as illus mes3, 1Honeybe lvd, Suite 200, Research, Pas t. Once the pr around its long thrusters.  Thi ng the sample ple into the coll as shown in Fi e Return Prob auger casing w hile the augers e container as lization of the tion of rotatio w the probe in prevent over pe can be stowed , and then dep llowing impac h mechanism t met and into t the Flipper M ng are fully ret s compressed, strated in Figur ee Ro, Pasaadena, robe is gitudiis spin acquilection igure 1 e will be  direct shown probe on and nto the enetrad while ployed ct, the to pull the upMechatracted mainre 4.   Figure 3: ( (Right) Sa Once t main body the entire grees as sh sampling t winch mec allowing th push the A Figure 4: ( Ascent Ve using Flip Comet cent Vehic The CAV accomplish time of lan spacecraft. will detach Clamp sys Figure 5.   Figure 5: ( Comet As (Left) Probe i ample capture the sample cas y of the probe, canister and w hown in Figur tube now facin chanism relea he spring with Auger and Casin (Left) Sample ehicle (Right) S per Mechanis t Ascent and cle (CAV) is th will calculate h a rendezvous nding and the   When the l h itself from th stem before sta (Left) Sample cent Vehicle t mpacts comet ed and extract sing is fully re the Flipper Me winch mechan re 4. With the ng away from ses a short am hin the Flipper ng towards a S e Canister tran Sample Canis sm Rendezvous: he upper stage e when it nee s with the RIS orbital positio launch time ar he lower stage u arting its asce e Canister seal akes off from t surface ed etracted into th echanism rotate nism by 180 d e opening of th m the comet, th mount of cabl r Mechanism Sealing Cap.  nsitioned to ter rotated The Comet A e of the CSSR ds to launch SC based on th on of the pare rrives the prob using a Marma nt, as shown led (Right) Comet  he es dehe he le, to  AsP. to he nt be an in  Fol the ma sets th apoaps contro the RI incomi then p rendez will th craft a Figure ing Sp Sa probe on the the Se ple Ca or of t rated, planeta the bra ger an once a ple can (ERV) Th maneu maind tinue comet ballisti cal pro RISC t comet materi quisiti orbit a Apaper w llowing releas aneuvering thr he CAV on a sis the probe w olled drift towa ISC will use r ming CAV and perform the m zvous with the hen grapple th as illustrated in e 6: Comet As pacecraft. Rob mple Sealing is secured to t e canister. Usin ealing Cap is s anister, and sep the double wa exposing the c ary protection aze, a hermetic nd comet samp again opened o anister is transf ) using the Rob he CAV will th uvered away so der of the RISC as a remote s until its batter ically impact t operties.  Mult to increase the sample and a ials acquired.  on operations and return to Ea Acknowledgem was performed se from the pr rusters perform a vertical asc will circularize ard the RISC.  D radar and/or L d refine its orb maneuvers nee RISC. A robo he probe and b Figure 6. scent Vehicle d botic Arm used g and Earth the RISC a her ng an inductio simultaneously parated from th alled Sample C clean interior s requirements. c seal is forme ple within the on Earth.  Foll ferred to an E botic Arm, and hen be released o it will not in C mission. The sensing space ries are deplete the comet to ga tiple probes cou e odds of a succ also increase th Following the the ERV will arth.  ments: The wo d under the NA robe's lower s m a small bur ent. Upon rea e its orbit and During this app LIDAR to trac bit.  The prob ded to compl otic arm on the berth it to the docks with Or d to grapple C Return: Onc rmetic seal is f on brazing tech y brazed to the he probe. The Canister is also surface to help Upon complet ed, enclosing th e Canister unti owing this, the Earth Return V d enclosed with d from the RIS nterfere with t e CAV can the craft, observin ed, or can be u ain insight on uld be carried cessful recover he amount of e end of samp l leave the com ork described i ASA SBIR Prog section rn that aching start a proach ck the be will ete its e RISC space rbitCAV ce the formed hnique e Samexterio sepap meet tion of he Auil it is e samVehicle hin. SC and the ren conng the used to physiby the ry of a comet ple acmetary in this gram.  