1557.PDF
PURSUING STEM:  HOW MARS EXPLORATION STUDENT DATA TEAMS (MESDT) STUDENTS ARE PREPARING FOR THEIR FUTURE IN SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATH (STEM) RELATED CAREERS THROUGH AUTHENTIC MARS RESEARCH B. Grigsby1, D. Turney2, S. Murchie2, D. Buczkowski2, H.  Nair2, K. Seelos2, C. Viviano2 T. Goudge3,1Arizona State University, Mars Space Flight Facility, Tempe, AZ, 2Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, , 3Brown University, Providence, RI;  bgrigsby@suhsd.net.   Introduction:  Students are increasingly challenged to gain real world experience that will prepare them for Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) related careers.  Providing students with such experience has been the goal of the Mars Exploration Student Data Teams (MESDT).  Since 2005, students across the nation involved in the MESDT program have been able to work closely with scientists and engineers associated with the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter’s CRISM (Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars) instrument.  With the guidance of motivated mentor teachers and scientists, teams of students are instructed on the use of multiple data sets, including the spectral analysis of the minerals on Mars using CRISM.  This program incorporates all areas of STEM, from foundational geological principals, through the analysis of surface morphology and culminating with conducting research using CRISM data from the CRISM Map (http://crism-map.jhuapl.edu/) website.  This student driven program combines teachers and scientists working as mentors to help guide students in conducting meaningful analysis of the surface of Mars.  This combination allows the teacher to be the conduit through which meaningful translation can be made between scientist and student.  As students are guided through a series of increasingly complex curriculum modules, they are given a firm foundation where they can ultimately build a research project they find meaningful and interesting.   By allowing students to come up with their own research projects, they take ownership of their learning, where it becomes personal and meaningful. Utilizing online methods of communication (via a password protected bulletin board forum), students can ask scientists questions, present their research and even communicate with other teams for collaboration research.  Experienced teams and teachers have also become mentors for new teams, by helping them navigate the waters of authentic scientific research. The flexibility of being able to conduct training and meetings through distance learning methods, allows teams to implement the program within their school schedules as necessary.  MESDT utilizes a desktop/tablet/smart-phone program called ZOOM to conduct virtual meetings between students and scientists.  These sessions are archived, and uploaded to YouTube for future viewing by students that may not have been able to attend the live session.  Through the process of having MESDT participants conduct authentic data analysis from a NASA spacecraft, students are able to gain understanding of the process of STEM related careers.  Students develop critical thinking skills, problem solving techniques, work in cooperative groups and increase their technical skills.  These skills are also modeled by the scientists as they work with the student teams to analyze the data, thus reinforcing the students’ comprehension.   Students researching surface features  Educational Impact:  Teachers have indicated in formative assessments that MESDT has had a definite impact on student’s choices for STEM related, postsecondary choices.  When asked how this program impacts students’ impressions and abilities in STEMrelated fields, one teacher responded:  “Thank you so much for giving us this opportunity. My students cannot wait till next year to continue with this program. We learned many lessons. I have students that are more excited about a career in research after participating in this program.”  Other comments that show how teachers and students alike have been impacted by the program:  “So much more came out of our participation (in MESDT).  Skills, knowledge, confidence, experience, etc.    It goes way beyond participant, more like a collaborator.”  “MESDT gave us the opportunity to conduct citizen science and make a difference (not a canned lab).”   “This program gave us the opportunity to give students a glimpse of authentic astronomical 1557.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
research (common core state standards to give students opportunities for real world and college experiences).  Teachers also indicated that the program gave a couple of their special needs students even more interest beyond the program:  “Two students with special needs were part of the group. I saw changes in them and had a very nice compliment from one of their parents who were amazed at how well their son was doing due to his participation in this program.  (Their increased) interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics left them wanting to learn more and continue on with the research.  For one, taking part of the presentation and talking was a huge step for him, I'm very proud of what he's accomplished.” In the summer of 2013, students involved in the MESDT program competed for a scholarship opportunity for teachers and their teams to attend the Planetary Geologic Mappers meeting at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC.  Two teams were invited to present their work with CRISM data at the meeting, which gave several students and their teachers’ firsthand experience discussing their ideas in a professional conference setting.  Students presented scientific posters and oral presentations alongside participating scientists from NASA and the United States Geological Survey (USGS). These types of experiences and opportunities allow students to expand their understanding of the real world of planetary exploration.  One of our previous MESDT mentor teachers, Denise Thompson, was selected as an Einstein Fellow for the 2012-13 school year (Einstein Fellows spend eleven months working in a Federal agency or in a U.S. Congressional office, bringing their extensive knowledge and experience in the classroom to education program and/or education policy efforts).  Denise was able to connect the two teams that attended the Mappers meeting with the senators from their state to discuss STEM education and their experiences with the MESDT program.  This type of opportunity would not have been possible without the previous experience of teachers such as Denise with the MESDT program.      Grosse Pointe HS students meeting with Senator Levin at the US Capitol Building while on a break from  the Planetary Geologic Mappers meeting  Modifications:  Over the years, MESDT has been modified to accommodate the needs of mentors and teachers involved. Changes include:  Changed the online distance learning software to a more streamlined program that allows archived sessions to be more readily available for teams.    Re-structured the learning cycle of the program to build on foundational principles of planetary science and included periodic assessments to gauge student understanding.  The new challenges for the teams have allowed for assessment of understanding throughout the MESDT process.  Increased student exposure from CRISM dataset alone to multiple data sets of Mars exploration to increase student awareness of the collaborative nature of how scientists conduct research.        Future Outcomes:  MESDT has been an important tool for teachers to emphasize Earth and Space Science principles and STEM content skills, as well as expose students to the foundations of the scientific process.  With the new Common Core Standards and the Next Generation Science Standards emphasizing real world application of science data, MESDT will easily fit the needs of science teachers and programs.  The program will continue to adjust and modify to the needs of the teachers and continue to collect data on the effects of MESDT for students STEM career choices.    Through available funding resources the MESDT program will attempt to provide opportunities for teachers and students to participate and conduct planetary research and practice professional communications of their discoveries.     1557.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
