1560.PDF
Identifying potentially hazardous 50-m class co-orbiting materials associated with known 'safe' Near-Earth Objects.  H. R. Lai1, C. T. Russell1, H. Y. Wei1, G. L. Delzanno2 and M. Connors3, 1UCLA, EPSS and IGPP, 603 Charles Young Drive, 3845 Slichter Hall Los Angeles CA 90095-1567, USA, hlai@igpp.ucla.edu, ctrussel@igpp.ucla.edu, hwei@igpp.ucla.edu; 2LANL, Los Alamos, NM, USA; 3Athabasca University, Athabasca, AB, Canada   Introduction:  Near-Earth Objects with dimensions of about 50m are the most hazardous both because they have higher impact probabilities than the rarer larger objects and because they can cause significant damage once entering the terrestrial atmosphere [1]. However, objects of such dimensions challenge the detectability of traditional surveys. In addition, even when a more visible 'parent' NEO might miss the Earth, it may have smaller 'invisible' co-orbiting materials which might be in hazardous orbits dispersed around the non-hazardous orbit of the 'parent' body. The probability of the co-orbiting materials colliding with smaller objects is larger since the smaller objects are more numerous. Collisions between the interplanetary objects can be catastrophic even when the impactors are 106 times less massive when the colliding velocity is tens of km/s. Debris of fine-sized dust particles released in the collisions becomes charged and can perturb the ambient solar wind, creating the so-called interplanetary field enhancements (IFEs) (Figure 1). We can use records of IFE occurrence to trace the interplanetary collisions and thus the spatial and temporal distributions of co-orbiting materials. Such a technique was first utilized on co-orbiting materials of asteroid 2201 Oljato with PVO observations [2]. And a followed up study with Venus Express observations suggested that the co-orbiting materials dissipated in 30 years [3]. We now use the same technique to identify the coorbiting materials of well-known NEOs with ecliptic plane crossing near to or inside the Earth's orbit. From the longitude distributions of IFE occurrence obtained by ACE and Wind, we find that the IFEs have a significant cluster in the longitude range bet een      and      (Figure 2). By comparing the trajectories of JPL documented NEOs, we find that the asteroid 138175 appears to be the parent body of the material responsible for these   Es.  his asteroid orbits the  un in a  .    inclined elliptical orbit  ith a period of    .   days.  ts descending node is at about      (Figure 3), where the IFE occurrence rate peaks (Figure 4). The spread of the IFE rate around the descending node indicates that the co-orbiting materials have significant dispersion about the asteroid's orbit.  he mass distribution of the associated IFEs indicates that most of the materials had a dimension of tens of meters before the collisions (Figure 5). With the knowledge of the number density, orbits and sizes of the co-orbiting materials, we can estimate their impact probability. This technique can help us develop a warning system: we can apply the technique to the remaining thousands of known NEOs crossing the ecliptic plane inside the Earth's orbit and find those that have co-orbiting materials which might be hazardous to the Earth. Alerts can be issued when the Earth approaches the orbits of objects with co-orbiting debris. Figures:  Figure 1. An IFE is characterized by an enhancement in the magnetic field strength. In most of the cases, there is a strong current sheet near the IFE center.   Figure 2. IFE annual rate as a function of heliocentric ecliptic longitude observed by Wind and ACE. The red lines are the average and the green lines are the standard deviation. In both observation, the IFEs cluster in the longitude range bet een      and     . 1560.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 3. The orbital projection of asteroid 138175 in the ecliptic plane (solid line). The locations of the asteroid (circle), its descending node (square) and ACE (cross) on April 19, 1998 ( when the IFE in Figure 1 was detected) are also shown in this plot.  he listed ∆Φ and ∆ρ are the longitudinal and radial distance separations between IFE and the asteroid, respectively.  Figure 4. The longitudinal annual rate distribution of IFEs which may be associated with the co-orbiting materials of asteroid 138175. This rate peaks near the descending node of the asteroid (dashed line).  Figure 5. Mass distribution of IFEs which may be associated with the co-orbiting materials of asteroid 138175. Most of the IFEs have a mass equivalent to rocks of tens of meters in diameter, which are the possible dimensions of the co-orbiting materials before the collisions. References:  [1] Shuvalov V. V. et al. (2013) Solar System Research, 47, 260-267. [2] Russell et al. (1984) Science, 226, 43. [3] Lai H.R. et al. (2013) Meteoritics & Planetary Science, Doi 10.1111 1560.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
