1563.PDF
NASA PLANETARY SCIENCE SUMMER SCHOOL:  TRAINING THE NEXT GENERATION OF PLANETARY MISSION LEADERS.  C. J. Budney1, L. L. Lowes1, K. L. Mitchell1, A. M. Sohus1, and A. S. Wessen1, 1NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, California 91109.  Introduction:	  	  Sponsored by NASA's Planetary Science Division and Radioisotope Power Systems Office, and managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the Planetary Science Summer School prepares the next generation of engineers and scientists to participate in future solar system exploration missions.  In 2014 we are holding 3 sessions that will serve 45-50 students who will work on early planetary mission designs addressing current community concerns, specifically missions with challenging power system issues. 	  Project Evolution:  This program was first organized by JPL in 1989 as a week-long series of lectures at the California Institute of Technology with a oneday tour of JPL.  This experience was conducted for 10 years, annually attended by 60-80 Post-Docs and PhDcandidates in planetary science who heard from cutting-edge researchers and networked with peers.  In 1999, JPL evolved the experience to utilize JPL's emerging concurrent mission design "Team X" as mentors. With this model, participants learn the mission life cycle, roles of scientists and engineers in a mission environment, mission design interconnectedness and trade-offs, and the importance of teamwork.  Participants: Applicants are sought who have a strong interest and experience in careers in planetary exploration, and who are science and engineering postdocs, recent PhDs, doctoral or graduate students, and faculty teaching such students.  Disciplines include planetary science, geoscience, geophysics, environmental science, aerospace engineering, mechanical engineering, and materials science.  Additionally in 2014, we are targeting applicants with strong power systems, system engineering, and/or mission analysis background. Participants are selected through a competitive review process, with selections based on the strength of the application and advisor's recommendation letter.  The majority of students come from top US universities with planetary science or aerospace-related engineering programs, such as University of Colorado, Brown University, MIT, Arizona State University, Georgia Tech, Caltech, University of Michigan, Stanford, UCLA, and UC Berkeley, over 50 different universities total. The Planetary Science Summer School Experience: Under the mentorship of a lead engineer and a lead scientist (most recently, Dr. Charles Budney and Dr. Karl Mitchell), students select, design, and develop a mission concept from the Planetary Science Decadal Survey, following the guidelines the NASA New Frontiers Announcement of Opportunity.  The 2014 sessions will include planetary exploration missions needing power system trade-offs, including the use of solar electric vs. Multi-mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (MMRTG). Students develop their mission in the JPL Advanced Projects Design Team (Team X) environment, which is a cross-functional multidisciplinary team of professional engineers and scientists that utilizes concurrent engineering methodologies to complete rapid design, analysis and evaluation of mission concept designs. In advance of an intensive week-long session in the Project Design Center at JPL, students select the mission and science goals during a series of eight weekly WebEx/telecons, and develop a preliminary suite of instrumentation and a science traceability matrix.  Students assume both a science team and a mission development role with JPL Team X mentors.  Once at JPL, students participate in a series of Team X project design sessions, during which their mentors aid them in finalizing their mission design and instrument suite, and in making the necessary trade-offs to stay within the cost cap.  Tours of JPL facilities highlight the endto-end life cycle of a mission.  At week's end, students present their Concept Study to a "proposal review board" of JPL scientists and engineers and NASA Headquarters executives, who feed back the strengths and weaknesses of their proposal and mission design. Project Impact: PSSS seeks to have a positive influence on participants' career choice and career progress, and to help feed the employment pipeline for NASA, aerospace, and related academia.  Over 500 students have participated in the Team X sessions since 1999.  "Snapshot" employment figures over the last several years show that between 20-25% of PSSS alumni are employed  by or affiliated with a NASA Center or JPL.  In a 2013 survey, 395 active emails of alumni from 1999-2012 were located, and 212 of those contacted (54%) responded.    Respondents indicated that PSSS directly affected their career choice, highlighted career options of available in planetary science exploration field, and/or added breadth and perspective to their current work.  They indicated PSSS gave them knowledge and skills that are still useful in their careers, with about half having roles in one or more spaceflight missions and proposals, including 84 leadership positions.  Alumni earned several awards include the Urey Prize from DPS, Macelwane Medal from AGU, Napolitano Award from AIF, and the Biggs Award from GSA. Implementation: The Planetary Science Summer School is implemented by the JPL Education Office in 1563.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
partnership with JPL's Team X Project Design Center. URL: http://pscischool.jpl.nasa.gov  1563.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
