 UPDATE ON MSL ATMOSPHERIC MONITORING MOVIES SOL 100-360.  J.E. Moores1, M.T. Lemmon2,   R. Francis3, The MSL Environmental Science Theme Group and the MSL Science and Engineering Teams 1Centre for Research in Earth and Space Science, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3 Canada (jmoores@yorku.ca), 2Texas A&M University, College Station, TX., 3Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, Western University, London, ON   Introduction:  To compliment and add context to the observations of atmospheric conditions at Gale Crater measured by the REMS Instrument [1] onboard MSL and the transport of water vapor by both REMS and DAN [2] Instruments, the rover acquires short movies of cloud and blowing dust aloft using the Navigation Cameras [3]. These observations include movies aimed vertically to track the movement of clouds (Zenith Movies [4]), movies aimed over the top of Aeolis Mons intended to observe cloud morphology  and to search for orographic effects (Suprahorizon or Mt. Sharp Movies) as well as Dust Devil Searches meant to compile a long-baseline record of dustiness to the North of the rover.  These observations and their results through sol 100 were previously discussed in 2013 [5] and this poster shall update these results through sol 360. With the addition of 260 sols to the record, the observations have surpassed one half of a martian year and document the warmest and driest season expected at Gale. While certain measurements are limited in the time of day when they may be performed, temporal coverage throughout the day has increased. Zenith Movies: Efforts at automated cloud tracking are described by Francis et al. [4], though there are few movies recorded in this period which are amenable to automated tracking of clouds. In order to assist with analyzing this data set, a ten-point qualitative assessment was devised with 10 representing a movie in which frame subtraction was unnecessary to see moving features, 8 represents clear features visible upon frame subtraction, 4 - faint features visible upon frame subtraction and 0 is a featureless frame. Between sols 101 and 360 only five movies out of 49 exhibit a score of 4 or higher and all were captured in the late afternoon (17:15 LTST or later) or early morning (09:30 LTST or earlier). The timing of the best contrast is well illustrated by two movies: a movie acquired during sunset on sol 312 and another movie taken in twilight just after sunset on sol 317. A characteristic frame from each is shown in Figure 1. However, the equatorial location of MSL means that illumination falls off very quickly after sunset and long exposure times and high dark current occurr after only a few minutes. SupraHorizon/Mt. Sharp Movies:  Similar to the Zenith movies, only four Mt. Sharp Movies out of 63 during this period have a score of four or greater. Unlike the Zenith movies, the Mt. Sharp Movies appear to  Figure 1: Frames from relatively high-contrast movies during the sol 101-360 period. Top - Sunset imaging towards the horizon on sol 312 reveals cloud streetlike features. Bottom - Twilight imaging zenith movie captures clouds along with Phobos. Note that the dark streak near the moon is an artifact of the frame subtraction processing method.  document a monotonic decrease in frame contrast with time. As the Mt. Sharp movies are typically acquired closer to local noon than are the Zenith Movies, this could represent a gradual reduction in the ability of the air above the landing site to achieve supersaturation during the warmest part of the day. This explanation would also explain the continued periodic observation of faint features in Zenith Movies, since these are acquired much closer to sunset and sunrise when atmospheric temperatures are colder and supersaturation is more probable in all seasons. This effect is not unexpected as Mars gradually leaves perihelion behind and solar insolation decreases.	  	  Dust-Devil Search Movies/ Line-of-Sight Opactity Movies:  Despite the acquisition of 63 Dust-Devil Search Movies over this period, no dust devils have been observed. As a result the statistics suggest a upper limit for the concentration of dust devils in Gale crater has been updated from [5]. Assuming a 6m diameter devil in [5], 1.14 km2 was found to have been surveyed through sol 100, but through sol 360, the surveyed area had increased to 16.92 km2. If the devils are 6 m across, this corresponds to ~2700 expected sightings based on the number of pressure drops seen in REMS data [6], and if devils are 100 m across, the expected number of sightings should be ~670. However, the only tentative detection remains the sol 41 movie. As such, any devils are almost certainly dustless.   As the season progresses, dust devils will become progressively less likely, however, the presence or absence of vortices is only one goal of this observation. By examining the contrast between the mountains in the distance (~ 30 km away) and the atmosphere above in these movies it is also possible to obtain a record of the line-of-sight dustiness in the crater towards the North in the NavCam passband cetered at  650 nm [3]. This may be compared to the record of  Figure 2 - Line of Sight vs. Column Extinctions column opacity at 880 nm by observing the solar disk using the MastCam. The correlation between these two measures is shown in Fig 2. The correlation between the two measures is good with the exception of an offset of approximately a factor of 1.8 and an anticorrelation near sol 230 and 270. The smaller extinctions observed using line-of-sight methods could indicate that crater circulation maintains a relatively low dust environment within the crater. Though clearly there is mixing, as evidenced by the sedimentation into the crater by the sol 100 dust storm [5], time may be required for this mixing which shows up in a delay between features in the two opacities. Anticipated Arrival of Wetter and Colder Conditions:  Atmospheric Movies collected during the first 60 sols of the mission showed good contrast highly suggestive [7] of the presence of water vapor and thin clouds in the atmosphere above Gale Crater and correlated with the dissipation of the aphelion cloud belt. As Mars proceeds towards aphelion it is anticipated that colder conditions and increasing availability of water vapor will result in more visible clouds. One of the objectives of the atmospheric monitoring campaign is to capture this onset of condensation in the atmosphere above Gale Crater and it is anticipated that these results will be available at LPSC in 2015. Conclusions:  The atmospheric monitoring movies campaign has added a significant number of movies, but few during the period of sols 101-360 contain features characteristic of supersaturation in the atmosphere above Gale Crater. This is likely characteristic of the local warm season and provides a baseline for the interpretation of results from the wetter and colder season anticipated to follow as Mars passes towards aphelion along its orbit. References: [1] Gomez-Elvira et al (2012) SSR 170(1):583-640 [2] Mitrofanov et al. (2012) SSR 170(1):559-582 [3] Maki et al (2012) SSR 170(1):77-93 [4] Francis et al (2014) This Conference [5] Moores et al. (2013) 44th LPSC abs nº1548 [6] Khanpaa et al. (2013) 44th LPSC abs nº3095 [7] Moores et al. (2010) JGR 115 (24) E00E08 