 EXTRATERRESTRIAL VIRTUAL FIELD EXPERIENCE.  C. Million1, R. Sullivan2, M. St. Clair1, A. Hayes2,3, NASA RPIF Network Node Directors and Managers, 1Million Concepts (chase@mill  ionconcepts.com  ), 2Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, Cornell University.  3Dept. of Astronomy, Cornell University. Introduction: To promote public access and use of planetary  spacecraft  data,  the  Spacecraft  Planetary Imaging  Facility  (SPIF)  at  Cornell  University,  a member  of  NASA's  Regional  Planetary  Imaging Facility Network (RPIFN) [1], has begun to participate in the Virtual Field Experience (VFE) program of the Paleontological Research Institute (PRI) [2]. The VFE program uses remote sensing data (e.g., images) of real terrestrial locations of geologic interest to create virtual environments  that  can  be  explored  by  teacher-led groups of students in an inquiry-based manner. In kind, SPIF has developed a prototype game-like classroom activity  called  the  Extraterrestrial  Virtual  Field Experience  (EVFE)  that  places  students  in  the  first person  role  of  the  mission  operations  team  for  the Opportunity Rover after its landing at Eagle crater on Mars [3]. Students are tasked to discover the source of hematite  signatures  detected  from  orbit  by commanding  the  rover  to  move  and  make measurements.  The  students'  ability  to  command movements  and  measurements  are  subject  to limitations on consumable resources as an abstracted representation of the operational constraints faced by actual mission teams. The EVFE has the potential to convey key  concepts  in  core  scientific  sub-topics  as well as generalized scientific and systems thinking. We anticipate that the EVFE will be used as an enrichment activity  in  junior  high  to  high  school  level  science classrooms  or  after  school  programs.  The  EVFE project is part of a new series of programs sponsored by the NASA RPIFN [1] to utilize digital resources to disseminate and describe the data returned by NASA's planetary  exploration  missions  to  the  general  public [3]. Overview: Student-players  are  presented  with  a graphical  interface  that  allows  them  to  browse  a panoramic  image of  a  site  as  well  as  front  and rear hazcam  images.  Footprints  (quadrilateral  regions), which denote areas of potential scientific interest  are overlaid on these data. The footprints have hover-over text  that describes  why  the  location  may  be  of scientific  interest. Selecting a footprint can make one or  more  scientific  instruments  available  in  the instrument  toolbar,  indicating  which  kind  of observations  can  be  made.  Selecting  an  instrument from the toolbar brings up a dialog that explains to the student-player  what  information  potentially  could  be gained by using the specific instrument, and how much time  would  be  consumed  by  the  measurement.  For example,  a  Mössbauer  observation  could  reveal information  about  iron-rich  minerals  at  the  given location,  and  require  40%  of  a  planning  day's resources.  The  user  has  the  option  to  enqueue  the observation for "uplink" to the rover. When the rover "plan"  or  "queue"  is  full  or  the  student-players  are ready, they can execute their final plan by choosing to uplink it to the rover, along with providing a scientific justification  for  the  selected  observations  (similar  to actual  rover  planning  strategies).  The  sol  counter advances,  and  results  of  the  observations  are immediately  returned  in  the  form  of  a  "Mission Manager  Report"  that  contains  data  from  requested observations  (in  the  form  of  images  or  graphs), scientific  interpretations  of  those  data, and recommendations  for  future  observations.  This  cycle repeats until all possible observations have been made or the mission ends at 90 sols. Users can download the complete set  of  Mission Manager Reports  as  both a reference and log of activities. Figure  1.  An  example  of  target  selection  with available  footprints  in  the  main  window,  available instruments along the left, queue along the bottom, and navigation to the right. Design:  The prototype EVFE user interface and behavior  was  designed  to  mimic,  but  in  a  greatly simplified way, the tools and procedures used by actual mission  scientists  requesting  observations  by  robotic spacecraft. In this case, the interface is an abstracted representation of the "maestro" toolkit [4] used by the Mars  Exploration  Rover  team  and,  whereas  real mission scientists  must  balance  a  number  of  limited spacecraft  resources  including  power,  data  capacity, and bandwidth, all spacecraft consumables within the EVFE are abstracted as simply "time." That is,  each activity takes a specific amount of time to perform and must be optimized against the limited amount of time    per day for activities and the limited number of days in the expected mission lifetime. While all images and graphics within the activity are derived exclusively from real mission data, not all mission data are available within the activity. Rather, a specific module or scenario contains a curated subset of the available data for that location. Descriptions and interpretations  of  the  data  are  written  by  an  actual mission  scientist  and  closely  track  the  thought processes of the actual mission science teams. The data and descriptions included within each module form a cohesive whole with a  core  narrative thread meant to convey specific key pieces of information and general concepts, not unlike a digital museum installation. Figure 2. An example of  the data review panel  and "mission  manager  report"  with  activity  justification and scientific analysis. The  prototype  software  runs  in  a  browser environment from a development web server, but the graphical interface and its modes of interaction were developed with the intention of the software eventually being  deployable  to  mobile  and  tablet  platforms  as well as a desktop environment. In  addition  to  the  front-end  module,  we  have designed  an  underlying  content  format--an  XML database  with  a  carefully  defined  structure--to  be extensible  to  a  number  of  manned  and  unmanned planetary surface mission data sets. In the expectation of  developing  future  modules  for  other  NASA missions, we have also developed a prototype content creation tool called SiteManager which assists a user in the creation of correctly formatted XML modules. Future Work:  The appropriate amount or level of content  for  the  target  audience  and  environment remains  an  open  challenge.  It  is  likely that  multiple modules will need to be developed--even for the same scenario--which  can  fit  into  different  educational environments.  Play-testing  in  junior  high  and  high school classrooms, expected to take place starting in Spring  of  2014,  should  prove  extremely  helpful  in refining these elements. Full deployment of the module to  classrooms,  including  detailed  teacher  guides  and mapping of modules and content to specific Common Core [5] and Next Generation Science Standards [6], may begin as early as late summer of 2014. We expect to generate new EVFE modules at a rate of at least one per year with data from a variety of missions. RPIF Network: The  NASA Regional  Planetary Imaging Facilities (RPIFs) are a network of 9 domestic and  7  international  planetary  image  libraries.  These facilities,  which  are  open  to  the  public,  maintain photographic  and  digital  data  as  well  as  mission documentation  and  cartographic  data.  Each  facility's holdings contain images and maps of planets and their satellites taken by solar system exploration spacecraft. By  placing  users  in  a  reconstructed  first  person narrative of  discovery,  the  EVFE addresses  the  long term vision of the RPIF Network to serve as a resource that provides the complete story of space exploration through  archived  data  products,  historical documentation, and outreach materials [7]. Acknowledgements: We would like to  thank the Regional  Planetary  Imaging  Facilties  Network  for sponsoring  this  project  and  NASA  for  providing support through grant NNX13AC79G. References: [1] Hagerty,  J.  (2013) RPIF 5-year plan USGS Tech. Report. [2]  Auer, S.L. et al. (2009)  Geo. Soc. of Am. Abstracts with Programs, Vol. 41, No. 7, p. 385 [3] Squyres, S. W. et al. (2004) Science, 306.5702: 1698-1703.   [4]  Fox,  Jason  M.  et  al.  (2006)  JPL, NASA. [5]  Council  of  Chief  State  School  Officers. (2010)  Nat.  Gov.  Ass.  Center  for  Best  Practices. [6] NGSS Lead States. (2013) Achieve, Inc. [7] Hagerty, J. J. (2012) LPSC Abstracts. Vol. 43. 