1588.PDF
THE SLATE ISLANDS IMPACT STRUCTURE, LAKE SUPERIOR, CANADA; FIELD AND PETROGRAPHIC OBSERVATIONS OF IMPACT BRECCIAS.  M. C. Kerrigan*1, J. Clayton1, A. M. Nuhn1, A. E. Pickersgill1, and G. R. Osinski1, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration/Dept. Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. (*mkerrig@uwo.ca)  Introduction: The Slate Islands, located 10 km from the northern shoreline of Lake Superior, consists of two main islands, Patterson Is. and Mortimer Is., and several small islets (Fig. 1). Together, the archipelago is approximately 7 km in diameter, and represents the eroded remains of the central uplift of a medium sized complex impact crater, 30–32 km in diameter [1], [2]. Currently the most reliable age estimate for the impact event is ~450 Ma, an Ar-Ar age determination from impact-generated pseudotachylite [3]. The target rocks of the Slate Islands impact structure are predominantly Archean metamorphosed volcanics and sedimentary units, 2.5-1 Ga [4]. There are also small areas of Proterozoic sedimentary units [5] mostly at one location on the western shore of Patterson Island. Field Expedition: In August of 2013 two weeks of fieldwork was carried out on the Slate Islands by a 6 person team from CPSX. From a basecamp in northern Patterson Island the coastlines of Patterson and Mortimer Islands were thoroughly explored, as well as the coastlines of many of the smaller islets. Most of the fieldwork and sample collection was confined to the coastlines as this is where the best rock exposure was found. The interior of the islands are densely vegetated and steeply sloped. This initial expedition included examination and sampling of all rock types on the islands as well as measurements of the distribution and orientations of dikes and shatter cones. This paper will focus on the field observations of the impact breccias of the Slate Islands and the initial results from the petrographic analysis of a suite of breccia samples. Impact Breccias: The breccias of the Slate Islands are seen to cut through or overlie all the other lithologies on the islands. While there are a few outcrops of massive breccia units, typically breccia occurs in the form of dikes or veins in the target rocks. The following varieties of breccias described here have been noted in previous literature [6], [7] and these descriptions are based on observations made during this field campaign. Polymict Breccias. The dominant type of breccia on the Slate Islands is polymict breccia and this typically occurs as veins and dikes varying in width from ~5 cm to 5 m. The matrix is typically fine grained and grey in colour. It contains a wide variety of angular to sub-rounded clasts of different lithologies, ranging in size from <1 mm to 10s of centimeters (Fig.2). Some of the clasts can also be seen to contain shatter cones.  ‘Red Breccia’. The red breccia refers to a large outcrop of polymict breccia on the west coast of Patterson Island. This breccia contains mostly sub-rounded clasts ranging in size from <1 cm up to very large blocks ~3 m in size. The matrix is fine grained, crumbly, and a deep red colour. This is likely as a result of alteration and hematite. ‘Megabreccia’. This type of polymict breccia gets its name ‘mega’ from the size of its clasts, up to 10s of meters. The megabreccia is exposed at one location on Figure 1. Map of the Slate Islands. The largest island, to the south is Patterson Island, with Mortimer to the north, and Delaute and Dupuis Islands to the northeast. The red star indicates basecamp for this field campaign. Map from Google Earth. Figure 2. Example of polymict breccia outcrop from the east coast of Patterson Island. Note the variety of clast size and colour. 1588.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
the southern coast of Patterson Island. The matrix of this unit is fine grained and red-brown in colour, likely due to alteration and hematite. Much of this site is submerged which posed limitations to sampling during this field campaign, however samples with clasts <10 cm were acquired from an area above water. ‘Suevite’ and ‘Bunte Breccia’. There are some locations on the southern and eastern coasts of Patterson and the western coast of Delaute which have previously been noted as ‘suevite’ and ‘bunte breccia’ due to the presence of ‘non-aerodynamically shaped glass fragments’ and ‘no glass fragments and no strongly shocked features’, respectively [7]. After visiting these outcrops we concluded that these features, or lack thereof, could not be identified in the field and these units appear to also be polymict breccias. Further petrographic analysis will be carried out on these particular samples to see if these features are present microscopically. Pseudotachylite. Pseudotachylite is relatively rare at the Slate Islands with minor occurrences found during this field campaign on the north shore of Patterson, the south shore of Mortimer, and the western shore of Dupuis. The matrix is extremely fine grained, black in colour, and hosts clasts less than 3 mm in size. The pseudotachylite occurs as small veins up to 5 cm wide and with a sharp but sometimes undulating contact with the surrounding rock (Fig. 3). Petrographic Analysis: An initial petrographic study has been conducted on samples representing different classes of breccia including; the red breccia, megabreccia, and polymict breccia. In one of the samples of the polymict breccia there are grains of spinel appearing as green in colour in PPL (Fig. 4). Spinel is associated with intense pressure and upper mantle material, and identification of spinel in central uplifts on the Moon is thought to represent lithologies uplifted from a deep crustal source [8]. In this case however the spinel could be associated with the metamorphism the target rocks here have experienced prior to the impact event. As of yet no PDFs have been identified in the samples but this is thought to be a result of a small sample size rather than a lack of these features in these lithologies and this work is ongoing. Future Work: Further petrographic and geochemical analysis will be carried out on the breccia samples to examine them for evidence of impact related shock features and post impact alteration. Further field work will be carried out in the summer of 2014 to continue mapping the occurrences of breccia in the interior of the islands in order to form a more complete picture of the structure of this central uplift. References:  [1] Halls H. C. and Grieve R. A. (1976). Can J Earth Sci, 13, 1301-1309. [2] Dressler B. O. et al. (1995) OGS, Misc. Pub., 164, 53-61. [4] Sage R. P. (1991). Ont. Geol. Survey Report, 264, 1-111. [5] Dressler B. O. and Sharpton V. L. (1997) Tectonophysics, 275, 285-311. [6] Sharpton L. and Dressler B. O. (1996) LPSC XXVVII, Abstract #1177. [7] Dressler B. O. et al. (1998) Contrib. Min. and Petrol., 130,275-287. [8] Lal, D., et al. (2012) J of Earth System Sci 121.3 847-853. Figure 4. Image of sample of polymict breccia from the east coast of Patterson Island in thin section, PPL. Note the green grains of spinel, isotropic in XPL, in the centre of the image. Scale bar is 500 µm. Figure 3. Example of pseudotachylite on the west coast of Dupuis. Note the sharp and undulating contact on the left and the thin vein on the right. 1588.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
