1614.PDF
SURFACE ROUGHNESS DERIVED FROM HIRISE VISIBLE IMAGERY: A CASE STUDY AT THE MSL LANDING SITE.  F. J. Calef III1 , R. Arvidson2, R. Sletten3, R. Williams4, J. Grotzinger5,1Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Caltech, fcalef@jpl.nasa.gov, 2Washionton University at St. Louis, arvidson@wunder.wustle.edu, 3University of Washionton, sletten@uw.edu, 4Planetary Science Institute, williams@psi.edu, 5California Institute of Technology, grotz@gps.caltech.edu.  Abstract:  Surface roughness is one of the main discriminators when identifying unique terrain types and for assessing rover traverse capability on Mars using orbital imagery. We've derived a simple metric based on image texture in a High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) orthophoto [from the work in 1] to provide a qualititative and semiquantitative assessement of vertical surface roughess on the decimeter scale. The maximum variation in digital number (DN) brightness over a 3x3 m (12x12 pixel) matrix,  the scale-size of the Curiosity rover, segregated into four discrete categories using Natural Breaks (Jenks) from the image histogram provides a good match to mapped terrain types using the same HiRISE image. The surface roughness categories are calibrated using rocks heights measured in stereo engineering cameras onboard the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) compared to the visible roughness values to specify the centimeter to meter vertical scale expected in each roughness pixel. With the vertical roughness gauged to actual rock heights, this metric could be used as a main layer in calculating a cost surface for path planning at the rover-scale. Hypothesis and Assumptions:  Our hypothesis is each terrain type has a unique surface roughness at a given length-scale that is synonymous with brightness variations (i.e. image texture) from high-frequency feature shading. We define surface roughness as the variation in vertical height between objects in a unit area. The main assumption in this technique is image DN value variations/texture are a direct response to shading from rocks or terrain micro-relief over decimeter scales. Each unique terrain type is assumed to have a unique texture (i.e. DN 'relief') at the matrix scale; a neighborhood of similar textures constitutes a terrain type. For assessing rover traverse, we are less concerned about the roughness distribution (e.g. median roughness) in the matrix as we are with the maximum roughness (i.e. tallest rock); thereby any large DN difference in a matrix equates to a larger height difference which in isolation represents a feature height. Caveates:  This technique appears immune to broad scale slope brightness/darkening related to sun opposition and minor changes in elevation greater than the matrix size. The largest caveat comes from true albedo/tone differences among terrain units or rocks and the underlying terrain. One can imagine a case where a perfectly dark flat rock lying on a flat bright surface would cause a false positive result assessing rock height. However, this case is not born out in the real world: shadow darkness is typically much darker than rock tone and the underlying surface and/or dust tends to attenuate most tonal differences. In terms of defining terrain types, the sharp contrasts are a positive. However, surface cracks filled with dark sand to the height of a bright surface again could lead to inflating surface heights (to be discussed), but much like the aforementioned scenario, provide an excellent signal for indentifying terrain types. A false negative case could occur where a uniformly dark terrain meets a uniformly bright terrain; in this case, only the border pixels between the units would be 'rough' while the different units themselves would be texturally 'smooth' and similar, although the assessed roughness would be essentially correct for the majority of the units. While there are clear specific cases where this technique does not work, they are easy to identify or 'fail' towards assessing roughness over terrain uniqueness or vice versa. Therefore, when using this technique one needs to assess the resulting roughness values with these two properties in mind. Methodology:  Our input is a section of a 0.25 cm/pixel HiRISE orthophoto generated from HiRISE RED image PSP_010573_1755 [NASA/Univ. of Arizona, 1] georeferenced to the MSL HiRISE basemap covering Bradbury Landing to Yellowknife Bay and MSL's traverse as of sol 360 (Figure 1A). The DN range is 8-bit (0-255), thereby we're using indexed brightness, not IOF or radiance. Other than the inherent radiometric correction in HiRISE image processing, we've performed no further photometric corrections. Using ArcGIS ArcTools software [2], we run the Block statistics tool with a rectangular matrix of 12 x 12 pixels (3x3 m) for the range (highest minus lowest DN) in the matrix. The range value is assigned to all the pixels in the matrix. Each matrix is nonoverlapping, i.e. a 'moving window' incremented by the matrix dimension. The resolution of the data is 3 m2. The resulting brightness range raster is subdivided into four categories using a Natural Break (Jenks) classification method. We calibrated the first category break by comparing the range value to the height of a known feature, Jack Matijevic, a ~30 cm high pyramidal shaped rock approached on sols 43-45, to get the first category to represent feature roughness in the low decimeter range (~10 cm high or less). The other cate1614.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
gories were quantified by comparing the range values to known scarp heights derived either from rover engineering cameras or HiRISE 1m/pixel elevation models. The other categories are: 'low roughness' at ~10-30 cm scale heights, 'moderate roughness' at ~30-50 cm, and 'high roughness' at ~>50 cm. Results:  As seen in Figure 1B and 1C, the roughness parameter qualitatively correlates with terrain types as delineated in the MSL landing ellipse geology map [3,4]. The 'smooth hummocky' terrain typified by subdued crater landforms and a few decimeter scale rocks is predominately categorized as 'smooth' with patches of 'low roughness' matching well with the pebbly lag seen in rover imagery near the landing site. Yellowknife Bay 'bright-toned fractured' terrain has more 'low roughness' values with some 'moderate' to 'high roughness' at the sub-meter scarps at Gillespie Lake, Point Lake, and ringing the drill sites (locations not shown in figure). The fractured floor in Yellowknife Bay may look somewhat rougher than it actually is because of darker sand or soil filling fractures in the low-relief bright-toned plates within it. In these cases, it may be that we're seeing more terrain type differentiation than actual surface roughness variations. Other bright terrains, e.g. the bright-toned outcrop ~100 m south of Bradbury Landing, has 'low roughness' from ~low decimeter scale bright (bedded?) outcrop seen in a crater shaped landform. The 'cratered surface' terrain is somewhere in between the others with ~equal numbers of 'smooth' and 'low roughness' values with some crater rims being 'moderately' rough. 'Ridged' terrains like Twin Cairns Island, observed on sols 342344, has one 'high roughness' pixel associated with meter scale boulders topping the east end of this ridge. Similar multi-decimeter scale boulders a top hills occur at Bell River and Elsie Mt. (imaged on sols 345 and 347 respectively) are 'moderately rough'. A cursory examination of the actual rover traverse versus the roughness catergories shows MSL stayed mostly on 'smooth' terrain types until it descended into Yellowknife Bay, but continued to traverse 'smooth' terrains on it's way toward Mt. Sharp. Conclusions and Future Work:  Terrain types, to first order, appear to correlate well with variations in image texture in HiRISE. Calibrating the image texture variations to measured ground heights or rocks and scarps provides a useful metric to evaluate similar features throughout the image. Future work will involve further calibration with rover engineering camera cmscale elevation models and actual clast counts to increase the correlation accuracy and perhaps assess subdecimeter roughness. References: [1] Golombek et al., (2012) Space Science Review, DOI:10.1007/s11214-012-9916-y. [2] Environmental Systems Research Institute, esri.com, [3] Calef et al., (2012) LPS XLIV, Abstract #1402. [4] Sumner et al. (2012) LPS XLIV, Abstract #1402.  Figure 1: Roughness deriveded from HiRISE image texture. A) HiRISE orthophoto basemap showing MSL traverse and drive waypoints [NASA/JPLCaltech/Univ. of Arizona]. B) Roughness map with 'smooth', 'low', 'moderate', and 'high' roughness categories. C) Terrain types near Bradbury Landing from [3,4] and roughness parameter at each drive location (colored dots). 1614.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
