1635.PDF
MERGING DIGITAL ELEVATION MODELS FROM THE LUNAR ORBITER LASER ALTIMETER AND KAGUYA TERRAIN CAMERA.  M. K. Barker1, E. Mazarico2,3, G. A. Neumann3,  D. E. Smith2,3 and M. T. Zuber2 1Sigma Space Corp.,  4600 Forbes Blvd. Lanham, MD 20706 michael.barker@sigmaspace.com, 2Dept. of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences,  MIT, 77 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139, 3Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 8800 Greenbelt Rd. Greenbelt, MD 20771.Introduction:  The Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) aboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) has collected over 6.3 billion measurements of surface height with a vertical precision of ~10 cm and an accuracy of ~1 m. The ability of LOLA to obtain measurements under uniform illumination conditions and in shadowed regions globally provides an advantage over passive stereoscopic imaging, particularly at high latitudes (> 60°) where imaging is hindered by low solar incidence angles.  This has allowed LOLA to produce the highest resolution and most accurate polar terrain models to date. However, due to LROʼs polar orbit, a few gaps in the LOLA coverage as wide as ~4 km still persist near the equator.Here we present preliminary results of efforts to fill in gaps in LOLA coverage by incorporating an independently-derived terrain model into the data postprocessing. Recently, the Terrain Camera (TC) aboard the SELENE (Kaguya) spacecraft produced a global digital elevation model (DEM) from stereo imaging with 10 m spatial posting [1]. The TC DEM is a highly complementary dataset with which to augment the LOLA dataset. We show here that the TC DEM can be registered to the LOLA geodetic framework with rootmean-square (RMS) elevation residuals as low as a few meters. The goal of this work is to produce the most complete global terrain model of the lunar surface by merging both high-resolution datasets while preserving the geodetic accuracy of the LOLA data.TC-to-LOLA Registration: The global TC DEM dataset is divided into separate 3°x3° tiles (available from the SELENE Data Archive [2]) that are mosaics of the TC's 1°-wide ground swaths. We obtained the 4800 tiles covering latitudes within ±60° and downsampled them from the original resolution of 4096 pix/deg to 512 pix/deg (60 m/pix at the equator) after we found that spurious speckle noise existed in the TC DEMs at smaller scales.  The LOLA data coverage is sufficiently dense for most purposes at latitudes outside this range. Errors in the TC DEMs result from imperfect knowledge of the SELENE orbit,  as well as camera pointing, flat-field, and distortion. Offsets in the LOLA profiles are due largely to orbit uncertainties and errors in the laser boresight model. To isolate these error sources, we follow a two-step approach when registering the TC DEMs to the LOLA data. First, we derive an affine coordinate transformation between every TC DEM tile and corresponding LOLA DEM. This tileaveraged transformation accounts for rotation, scale, shear, and translation. The result is a TC DEM with similar geodetic accuracy as the LOLA data. To account for geolocation errors in the LOLA profiles, we then fit a single 3-dimensional (3-D) offset to each full resolution LOLA profile passing through a transformed TC DEM. Results:  Figure 1 shows the RMS vertical residuals between the ~1 million (3°-long in latitude) LOLA profile segments and transformed TC DEMs before (blue) and after (red) applying 3-D offsets to the profiles. The median initial/final RMS is 4/3 m with a median absolute deviation (MAD) of 0.3/0.5 m. The absolute 3-D offsets were typically ~10 m in the horizontal directions and ~1 m vertically with MADs of ~10 m and ~1 m. The typical tile-averaged translational offsets were at the sub-pixel level: ~30 m horizontally and ~5 m vertically.The best agreement between the fully registered TC and LOLA data tends to occur in regions of smooth terrain (see Figure 2).  In such regions, latitudinal ripFigure 1 - RMS vertical residuals between ~1 million LOLA profile segments and 4800 registered TC DEMs within ±60° latitude. Blue/red points are before/after applying 3-D offsets to profiles.1635.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
ples are visible in the difference map possibly due to  spacecraft jitter.Figure 3a shows an example of a LOLA DEM of the landing site of the Chang'e 3 spacecraft after applying the 3-D offsets described above. Empty pixels were interpolated with a continuous curvature surface. It is also now possible to fill the empty pixels with the corresponding pixels of the geodetically-controlled TC DEM. The resulting merged DEM (Figure 3b) reveals  surface detail that would otherwise be absent or heavily smoothed in the LOLA-only interpolated DEM. The merged DEM gives an elevation of -2.630 km for the Chang'e 3 site,  using the location (44.1214° N, 340.4884° E) derived by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) team from a pair of Narrow Angle Camera images [3].  This is 10 m higher than the value derived using the Wide Angle Camera GLD100 DEM [3].The merged TC/LOLA dataset has many potential applications. Studies requiring geodetically accurate global coverage will benefit especially. We plan to incorporate it into the LOLA data processing pipeline to improve the classification of valid and invalid returns, thereby extending the maximum range over which ground returns can be recognized. Moreover, the profile 3-D offsets can be used to form pseudocrossovers to help characterize orbital errors, the LOLA boresight model, and tidal deformations.Future work will incorporate a newer version of the TC dataset with an improved camera model and updated SELENE orbital reconstruction. In addition, the  registration could be improved by inputting the 1°wide ground swaths instead of the 3°x3° tiles.Acknowledgments: We gratefully acknowledge J. Haruyama, the entire TC team, and the SELENE Data Archive for kindly providing the TC data. SELENE is a Japanese mission developed and operated by JAXA.References: [1] Haruyama, J.  et al.  (2012) LPSC 43, #1200. [2] SELENE Data Archive site, http://l2db.selene.darts.isas.jaxa.jp/archive/index.html.en. [3] Robinson, M. et al., (2013) Dec. 30, http://lroc.sese.asu.edu/news/index.php.Figure 3 - (a) LOLA DEM of Chang'e 3 landing site (labeled red circle) in Mercator projection. Continuous curvature interpolation is used to fill gaps between tracks. (b) Merged DEM where the fully registered TC DEM is used to fill the gaps.(a)(b)Figure 2 - Difference map between fully registered TC and LOLA datasets. Smaller differences tend to occur in areas of smoother terrain. Horizontal ripples visible over the maria could indicate spacecraft jitter.1635.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
