1661.PDF
NEPHELINIZATION AND METASOMATISM IN THE ORDINARY CHONDRITE PARNALLEE (LL3.6).  J. A. Lewis and R. H. Jones, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131. jlewis11@unm.edu.  Introduction:  Metamorphism in ordinary chondrites shows a characteristic trend from unmetamorphosed petrologic type 3.0 through fully recrystallized type 6. Feldspar found within relict chondrules in type 4-6 chondrites is commonly thought to be formed by recrystallization of chondrule mesostasis during metamorphism [1]. Fluids are not typically considered to play a signifcant role during this process. However, there is evidence for the presence and action of fluids on the OC parent bodies: anorthitic feldspar in LL4 chondrites shows albitization and dissolution lamellae [2], and phosphate minerals have properties such as porous textures [3]. In petrologic type 3.2-3.7 CO chondrites, nepheline is known to replace anorthite within chondrules [4] and refractory inclusions [5], in reactions believed to be the result of alkali metasomatism. Nepheline has rarely been described in ordinary chondrites but has been identified in LL3.6 Parnallee in an igneous inclusion [6] and in chondrules [7]. However, nepheline identified in these studies occurs in fine grained assemblages which show little relation to the replacement textures seen in CO chondrites. [6,7] suggested  the possibility that nepheline in Parnallee has an igneous origin. We have found CO-like nephelinization textures within chondrules of Parnallee. This adds to the evidence for alkali metasomatism on the OC parent body. Analytical Methods:  We examined a single thin section (UNM 1018) of Parnallee (LL3.6). Feldspar and nepheline were imaged and identified with BSE imaging and EDS analysis using an FEI Quanta 3D FEG-SEM at 10 kV and 11-16 nA. Quantitative WDS analysis was conducted on a JEOL 8200 electron microprobe using a 1 μm beam diameter, due to the fine scale nature of the feldspar/nepheline features. Analyses were conducted at 15 kV and 10 nA to reduce migration/volatilization of Na and Cl. In addition, we used time dependent integration (TDI) corrections for both Na and Cl to compensate for any migration or volatilization that may be occurring.  Results:  Nepheline was found in a texture that indicates it is replacing anorthite in 5 relict porhyritic olivine-pyroxene chondrules (Chs 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7). The replacement texture appears to be crystallographically controlled and commonly occurs in multiple series of parallel lamellae as well as more massive areas (Fig. 1a). In Ch3, nephelinization is accompanied by 0.5-1.5 μm diameter silica rich nodules with what appear to be hedenbergite rims (Fig. 1b). Some of the anorthite grains show twinning which is preserved in the nephelinized regions (Fig. 1c). We compare the nephelinized chondrules with three chondrules that contain feldspar but no nephelinization (Chs 2, 8, and 9). Ch2 contains fine-grained anorthite and may include minor fine-grained nepheline, but the Figure 1:  BSE images showing (a) nephelinization of anorthite in Ch3 and (b) silica rich nodules with what appear to be hedenbergite rims, also Ch3. (c) illustrates the preservation of anorthite twins, highlighted by nepheline lamellae, in Ch4 and (d) shows dissolution lamellae in Ch8. 1661.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
replacement texture was not seen. In Ch8, anorthite contains dissolution lamellae (Fig. 1d) and albitization along the edges of the anorthite grains. Feldspar in Ch9 is albitic and shows no evidence of alteration. WDS analyses give an average feldspar composition of An83Ab17 for the unaltered anorthite in all chondrules. Individual analyses overlap phases and show mixing trends to both nepheline and albite (Fig. 2a). In nephelinized chondrules, the albitic compositions are found near chondrule rims. Feldspar in Ch8 is generally anorthitic with some albitic compositions, although elevated Na2O in the analyses indicates minor nepheline may also be present. Feldspar in Ch9 is albitic, without any nepheline. Individual WDS analyses on intergrown anorthite/ nepheline material contain  up to 3.7 wt.% Cl. A mixing plot of Na2O vs. Cl possibly indicates the presence of fine-grained sodalite or marialitic scapolite (Fig. 2b). We were unable to identify individual grains of either of these Cl-bearing minerals at a scale of >1 μm. Discussion:  Anorthitic plagioclase in chondrules within Parnallee might be considered to have formed by recrystallization of feldspathic glass during metamorphic heating. However, several lines of evidence indicate that it is a primary igneous mineral that formed during chondrule formation. Much of the anorthite and nephelinized anorthite occurs as euhedral or subhedral laths and the replacement, which highlights the crystallographic orientation, indicates twinning (Fig. 1c). These features indicate an origin by growth from a melt. In addition, many chondrules in Parnallee still have glassy or only slightly devitrified mesostasis, implying that heating was insufficient to recrystallize glass and form large (tens of m) anorthite grains. Nephelinization textures in Parnallee are very similar to those that have been described in CO chondrites, including the lamellar replacement textures and the presence of silica/hedenbergite(?) inclusions [4]. It has been suggested that nephelinization in CO chondrites occurred by alteration to hydrated nepheline and subsequent dehydration during metamorphism [4]. We propose that a similar process is recorded in Parnallee.  Cl was likely introduced at the same time as the Na, as only Na bearing phases show significant amounts of Cl. [7] decribed Na and Cl rich chondrule mesostasis in Parnallee but attributed this to an influx of Na and Cl during crystallization, rather than enrichment by fluids on the parent body. The bulk Cl isotope composition of Parnallee is anomalous among OCs [8] and this may be an indication of unique conditions for this chondrite. In addition to early metasomatism, late stage fluids may also have been present as indicated by the dissolution lamellae and albitization reactions seen in Ch8. In Ch8, dissolution occurs in anorthite that has the same composition as the nephelinized primary anorthite, suggesting  that this chondrule escaped nephelinization but was later subject to metasomatism similar to that seen in type 4 OCs [2]. However, the timing remains ambiguous due to the absence of dissolution lamellae in any of the nepheline-bearing chondrules.  Evidence for metasomatism on the OC parent bodies is very clear in anorthite, and may have been overlooked in the past due to the low abundance of primary anorthite present in OCs. However, the source of the fluids is still unknown. A nepheline-bearing clast in Parnallee has  negative 17O values [6], indicating the fluids may have originated from carbonaceous chondrite sources. Further work will need to be done in order to identify the source of these metasomatic fluids and to determining how prevalent such reactions were on ordinary chondrite parent bodies. References:  [1] Huss G. R. et al. (2006) Meteorites and the Early Solar System II, 567-586. [2] Jones R. H. and Brearley A. J. (2010) LPS XLI, Abstract #2133. [3] Jones R. H. et al. (2012) NIPR Symp. Antarct. Meteorites XXXV, Abstract E57.  [4] Tomeoka K. and Itoh D. (2004) MAPS, 39, 1359–1373. [5] Russell S. S. et al. (1998) GCA, 64, 4, 689–714. [6] Bridges J. C. et al. (1995) Proc. NIPR Symp. Antarct. Meteorites, 8, 195–203. [7] Bridges J. C. et al. (1997) MAPS, 32, 555–565. [8] Sharp Z. D. et al. (2013) GCA, 107, 189–204.  Figure 2:  Plots of feldspar/nepheline WDS analyses with solid circles for nephelinized chondrules and open circles for nonnephelinized, feldspar-bearing chondrules. (a) shows Na2O vs. SiO2 with mixing trends between anorthite (An), nepheline (Ne), and albite (Ab). (b) illustrates Na dependence of Cl content and the possible presence of sodalite (So) and marialitic scapolite (Sc). 1661.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
