1675.PDF
THE VARIABILITY OF CRATER IDENTIFICATION AMONG EXPERT AND COMMUNITY CRATER ANALYSTS.  S.J. Robbins1,*, I. Antonenko2, M.R. Kirchoff3, C.R. Chapman3, C.I. Fassett4, R.R. Herrick5, K. Singer6, M. Zanetti6, C. Lehan7, D. Huang7, P.L. Gay7.  1LASP, 3665 Discovery Dr., University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309; 2Planetary Institute of Toronto, 197 Fairview Ave. Toronto, ON  M6P 3A6, Canada  and University of Western Ontario, 1151 Richmond St. N. London, ON  N6A 5B7, Canada; 3Southwest Research Institute; 1050 Walnut Street, Suite 300, Boulder, CO 80502; 4Department of Astronomy, Mount Holyoke College, 50 College St., South Hadley, MA 01075; 5Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK  99775; 6Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences and McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Dr., Saint Louis, MO 63130; 7The Center for STEM Research, Education, and Outreach at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Edwardsville, IL 62025 IL.  *stuart.robbins@colorado.edu  Introduction:  Statistical studies of impact crater populations have been used to model ages of planetary surfaces for several decades [1].  This assumes that crater counts are approximately invariant and a "correct" population will be identified if the analyst is skilled and diligent.  However, the reality is that crater identification is somewhat subjective, so variability between analysts, or even a single analyst's variation from day-to-day, is expected [e.g., 2-3].  This study was undertaken to quantify that variability within an expert analyst population and between experts and minimally trained volunteers. Methods:  Eight scientists (authors 1-8), each with at least 6 years of crater counting experience, were recruited to measure craters on two images using their preferred software.  The software included ArcGIS (by ESRI) with various extensions, JMARS (by ASU), DS9 (by Smithsonian Astrophysical Obs.) with custom add-ons, and the Moon Mappers ("MM") interface (by CosmoQuest).  In addition, two researchers (Antonenko and Robbins) used several interfaces to decouple differences between software packages and individuals.  The first region analyzed was a 4107×2218-px segment of Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) NarrowAngle Camera (NAC) M146959973L (63 cm/px) data, near the Apollo 15 site.  The region has ~1000 craters in the 10-400 m range and craters ≲150 m are in empirical saturation for (typical for mare [4]), representing a worst case for crater counting repeatability.  Volunteers from the MM project also identified craters in this image.  The second image, viewed only by the experts, was LRO Wide-Angle Camera (WAC) image M119455712M that contains both mare and highlands. Individual markings were grouped for experts and volunteers using a clustering code to identify which marked features represent the same crater marked by different persons.  In the expert data, craters marked in 5 or more instances (NAC) were deemed "verified" and added to a final "ensemble" crater catalog (this was reduced to ≥4 for WAC data because the number of observations was 2 fewer); this threshold may vary for different applications.  In the volunteer data, craters marked by ≥6 persons were "verified."  Individuals' results were compared amongst themselves and to the ensemble catalog.  Analyses were done in units of pixels so that results may be generalized.  The NAC results are shown in Fig. 1, and the crater population data are displayed as cumulative size-frequency distributions (CSFDs) and R-plots in Fig. 2. Results:  First, experts using the MM interface were compared with volunteers to determine if there is reasonable agreement between experts and volunteers; they were also compared with experts' preferred software to determine if experts can reasonably reproduce their counts regardless of interface.  Both hypotheses were validated. Our second investigation used the CSFDs shown in Fig. 2 along with the ensemble result.  These illustrate a large dispersion in the number of craters identified at any given diameter. Experts' tandard deviation (σ) from the ensemble NAC ranged from 21% for D ≈ 18 px (~12 m) to 32% for D ≈ 100 px (~70 m).  This implies expert CSFDs are more consistent for smaller craters than larger craters, possibly due to fewer craters and more degradation at large sizes.  This is similar to the results of [2].  WAC mare data have a minimum dispersion of 13% for D ≈ 10 px; WAC highlands have a dispersion of 30–40% across all diameters. Third, we studied the populations with Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) tests to determine if the experts and volunteers found similar populations regardless of the  number of craters found.  The NAC data show poor agreement among experts for D ≥ 18 px, with 54% of data pairs representing different populations (P-value <0.01).  Agreement improved when smaller diameters were removed, with 39% representing different populations at D ≥ 22 px (~15 m) and only 18% being different at D ≥ 25 px (~17 m), suggesting that aliasing effects occur at smaller diameters.  Similar effects were found for the WAC data, though agreement was better at smaller diameters (researchers also identified smaller craters in WAC data).  Consistency among different interfaces for individual experts was also variable.  Robbins conducted NAC counts using MM and ArcGIS.  His results show good agreement over the entire diameter range: the two CSFDs are within 1 σ of each other's error bars at all diameters.  Antonenko conducted NAC counts using MM, JMARS, and ArcGIS (with CraterHelper tools).  Her results are more complicated; all three methods agree to 1 σ for large craters (D > 80 px), ArcGIS and JMARS data differ by >1 σ from the MM data for medium (30 < D 1675.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
< 80 px) and small (D < 25 px) craters, respectively. For D ≥ 25 px, K-S test P-values of <0.05 suggest none of Antonenko's data unambiguously represent the same population.  This shows that individual experts may produce varying results via different interfaces. Fourth, we compared individual NAC craters between the experts and volunteers.  To within the standard deviations from the weighted means of the ensemble results, all matched crater diameters agreed (e.g., Fig. 1, right).  We found that volunteers generally have a 2× greater dispersion than experts in both crater diameter and location. Fifth, we separated the craters by preservation state (Chapman and Robbins classified them in four different classes).  We found volunteers have a more difficult time than experts identifying highly degraded craters, such as Fig. 1 bottom-right.  We also found that the scatter in crater measurement (diameter and location) was independent of preservation for both experts and volunteers except for expert diameter measurement in NAC data, where there was better agreement for more pristine craters. Finally, we investigated artifacts near the minimum diameter.  The NAC image's cutoff was set at D < 18 px, and we found that all experts were complete at those diameters with few artifacts; they accomplished this by identifying craters to at least 2 px smaller.  Volunteers, however, showed significant artifacts for 18 ≤ D < 21.5 px; this was in part due to the MM interface nor allowing identification of small-D craters, so the clustering algorithm could not include the smaller diameters in the average.  In WAC data, no cutoff was set and experts were varied in (1) where they thought their completeness was (Fig. 2, arrows), (2) their method for determining it, and (3) their estimate's success relative to the ensemble.  We also saw a disturbing feature of there being no trend in artifacts near an individual's completeness level – some showed a gradually decreasing population before a sharp decrease, others a sharp uptick, while others followed a normal population until their completeness level. Implications:  This study has significant implications for comparisons of model surface ages determined by different researchers.  Results show that variability in crater counts between different experts regardless of interface is generally ~15–40% but can be as much as a factor of 2 different.  When using these populations to estimate ages (despite secondary craters being included), they vary from 1.5±0.7 to 3.2±0.8 Gyr (NAC), 1.3±0.4 to 2.2±0.5 (WAC, mare), and 3.4±0.1 to 3.8±0.0 (WAC, highlands).  Meanwhile, the NAC ensemble age for experts and volunteers are 2.71 and 2.72 Gyr, respectively, showing that volunteers as an ensemble can produce crater population statistics as good as experts.  From this, we also conclude that it is inappropriate to quote model crater ages to three or more significant figures, and that standard Poisson uncertainties are a minimum because they do not factor in the single analyst's threshold of detection and the larger variations expected among other experts. References: [1] Shoemaker & Hackman (1962), in The Moon, LPI, p. 289-300.  [2] Greeley & Gault (1970), doi: 10.1007/BF00561875.  [3] Hiesinger et al. (2012), doi: 10.1029/2011JE003935.  [4] Shoemaker (1965), in Nature of Lun. Surfaces, 23-77.  Figure 1:  Left— NAC areas analyzed in this study with markings overlaid.  Top are expert markings, bottom are volunteer data; both only show craters D ≥ 18 px.  Expert markings are color-coded to correspond with Fig. 2.  White circles are results from the clustering algorithm.  Right— Example craters are shown with expert markings and ensemble craters (left column) and volunteer markings and ensemble craters (right column); craters are in order of increasing modification.  Below each pair is the number (N) of persons who marked that crater and the mean diameter (D) with σ.  Values in parentheses are relative standard deviations (δD/µD; δ(x,y)/µD).  Figure 2:  CSFDs (top) and R-plots (bottom) of data for craters in the NAC image (left), WAC mare (middle), and WAC highlands (right).  Colors are different experts (see legend).  Dark grey is the clustered expert data and light grey is the clustered volunteer data (latter is NAC only).  Dashed lines on R-plots correspond to 3% and 5% of geometric saturation.  Small vertical arrows (WAC) are where each expert estimated their completeness to be.  Horizontal and vertical axes are different for the NAC and WAC columns because of different completeness levels.  Error bars have been removed from the CSFDs for clarity; the vertical scale is the cumulative number of craters so uncertainty is N1/2 (e.g., ±10 for Ncumulative = 100). 1675.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
