1696.PDF
DETERMINATION AND UNCERTAINTY ANALYSIS OF MERCURY LIBRATION USING BEPI COLOMBO HRIC IMAGES.  A. Aboudan1, G. Colombatti1, S. Debei1, P. Palumbo2 and E. Flamini3, 1Centre of Studies and Activites for Space C.I.S.A.S. - G. Colombo, University of Padua, via Venezia 15, 35131, Padua - Italy (alessio.aboudan@unipd.it), 2DiST, Parthenope University, Centro Direzionale Is. C4, 80143 Naples - Italy, 3Italian Space Agency, via del Politecnico SNC, 00133, Rome-Italy.   Introduction:  BepiColombo is a joint ESA/JAXA mission planned at launch in 2016 that will characterise in detail the Mercury exosphere composition, surface geomorphology, internal structure, gravity field and magnetic field [1]. On-board the Mercury Planetary Orbiter, the High Resolution Imaging Channel (HRIC), part of the SIMBIO-SYS (Spectrometer and Imagers for MPO Bepicolombo Integrated Observatory - SYStem) instrument suite, will provide images of the planet with meter-scale resolution. High-resolution images will be used to support the geomorphological analysis of the surface and the BepiColombo rotation experiment aimed to measure the rotational motion of the planet [2]. In this work a process for the libration estimation from imaged landmarks is proposed and the accuracy of the method is properly investigated to support a better definition of the experiment. Libration:  Mercury has a rotation period of 58.68 days with a 3:2 spin-orbit resonance and its rotation rate is not constant but slowly varies with 88 days period (libration). Since Mercury has an equatorial asymmetry, the libration is due to the torques exerted from by Sun and the other planetary bodies and, in turn, it is related with the inertia moment of the planet and with its interior. Mercury's high mean density indicates the presence of a large iron core. If this core is liquid, the libration is essentially a movement of the mantle and its amplitude results to be higher than in the case of a solid interior. For example libration models predict a libration amplitude of about 0.006 ° for a solid core and a range of amplitudes from 0.01 ° to 0.02 ° for the liquid core [3][4]. Note that Earth-based radar measurements seem to confirm the existence of a liquid core [5]. The Mercury rotation model used in this work is taken from [4]. The rotation angle is expressed as a constant rate rotation plus a libration term containing the effects of the Sun, Venus and Jupiter. Libration angle is a sum of sinusoidal terms: γ=g0sin(φ0(t)) + g1sin(φ1(t)) + g2sin(φ2(t)) + g3sin(φ3(t)) where the orbital parameters (functions φ(t)) are assumed known while the amplitude of the components g0, g1 (Sun), g2 (Venus) and g3 (Jupiter) have to be estimated. Imaging and landmark tracking:  Images that will be used to estimate the libration shall be compatible with the HRIC image acquisition plan. This puts limitations on the number of images to be used (to cope with data volume constraints) and to the latitude and longitude of the landmarks. In this work we assumed that landmarks will lie in the latitude range from -15 ° to +15 ° where the maximum landmark shift will be observed. Moreover, 70% minimum overlapping between images of the same area and a phase angle wrt the Sun in the range 10° to 60° have been assumed to guarantee correspondence finding and subpixel matching. Simulations performed with theese constraints have shown that a mean number of 85 landmarks should be available for the rotation experiment. The search for landmarks will be constrained by the camera observation geometry. Landmarks can be extracted using SIFT or SURF algortihms or selected manually. Fitting procedure and uncertainty:  a geometric model of HRIC is used to compute the line of sight of each imaged landmark. Then the S/C attitude and inertial position are used to project the lines of sight on the planet surface (assuming a known reference geoid). Finally Mercury rotation model is used to correlate the inertial position of the imaged landmarks (at different epochs) with the planet libration. The uncertainty on the position of each landmark depends both on camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters. In particular the following uncertainty sources have been considered: feature position on the image plane (due to image noise, matching process and optical distortions), camera optical centre position, camera focal length and camera pixel size (thermomechanical), S/C position and S/C attitude. The libration parameters g0, g1, g2 and g3 are then computed as a resut of maximum likelihood fitting. Finally, the uncertainty on the fitted parameters and on the estimated libration γ are computed. Results:  hundreds of mission data sets have been simulated with a variable number of landmarks. Using 25 or more landmarks guarantee proper algorithm convergence and stability. While using more of 80 landmarks does not result in improved fitting.  1696.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
                   Figure 1: simulated libration (blue) and fitted libration (red) with 1σ uncertainty bounds for periherm, mixed and apoherm observations.   Figure 1 shows an example of the fitting. The libration angle is correctly retrieved from the observed landmarks. The g0 , g1 (Sun) and g3 (Jupiter) parameters provide the higher contribution to the libration and are correctly fitted with an error that is one or two orders of magnitude lower than the true value. Only g2 (Venus) seems to be too small to be estimated correctly and the error is comparable with the true value. Since the observation uncertainty depends strongly on the S/C altitude three cases have been considered: landmarks extracted from images at the periherm, landmarks extracted from images at the apoherm and a combination of the two (mixed). In general the uncertainty on g0, g1, g2, g3 and on the total libration depend strongly on the considered scenario (periherm, mixed, apoherm). In particular the g2 and g3 terms present high sensitivity on the input parameters that can prevent their correct estimation no matter of which scenario is considered. The uncertainty on the estimated libration angle resulted to be 7.3e-3 ° (1σ) for periherm observations, 1.9 e-2 ° (1σ) for mixed observations and 2.7e-2 ° (1σ) for apoherm observations. Hence only images taken at periherm can guarantee a good fitting of the libration angle. The higher contribution to the overall uncertainty is related with S/C attitude determination; an improvement of the attitude determination accuracy can greatly reduce the uncertainty on the libration angle and enable the separate estimation of each term.    References: [1] Benkhoff J. et al. (2010) Planet. & Space Sci., 58, 2-20. [2] Flamini E. et al. (2010) Planet. & Space Sci., 58, 125-143. [3] Rivoldini A. et al. (2009) Icarus, 201, 12-30. [4] Pfyffer G. et al. (2011) Planet. & Space Sci., 59, 848-861. [5] Margot J. L. et al. (2007) Science, 316, 710-714. 1696.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
