1712.PDF
SIZE-FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTIONS OF SMALL IMPACT CRATERS ON VESTA - IMPLICATIONSFOR SECONDARY CRATERING A. Neesemann1, T. Kneissl1, N. Schmedemann1, S. Walter1, C. Raymond2,C.T. Russell3, 1Inst. of Geological Sciences, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Planetary Sciences and Remote SensingGroup, Dept. Earth Science, Malteserstr. 74-100, 12249 Berlin, (Germany); adrian.neesemann@fu-berlin.de; 2JPL,California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA; 3 Inst. of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, Dept. of Earth andSpace Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,Introduction: Dawn is the first comprehensive mission designed to explore the two most massive mainbelt asteroids, Vesta and Ceres in detail [1]. To investigate size-frequency distributions (SFD’s) of small impact craters on Vesta we make use of clear filter imagedata aquired by the Framing Camera (FC) during theLow Altitude Mapping Orbit (LAMO) with a resolutionbetween 15 - 20 m/px. This allows us for the first timeto study small craters and especially the potential of secondary cratering on a low gravity body in such detail.Background: We depend on sub-kilometer impactcraters as it is only these that occur in statistically significant numbers on fresh and/or small units (like recent mass wastings or fresh rayed craters) to determinetheir relative and absolute ages. By making use of smallcraters statistical robustness can increase but can become problematic in cases of contamination by unrecognized secondary background craters. On the otherhand, very young surfaces should be free of backgroundsecondaries as far as possible. Thus for our investigation of the SFD of small impact craters we performedcrater counts on the youngest surface units on Vesta,namely continuous ejecta blankets of rayed craters andanalyzed its distant dependent change and distributionsof secondary craters. Additionally, we compared our results with CSFD’s measured on mass wasting deposits(i.a. within Licinia and Octavia crater), that were obviously formed during a short and distinct process. Weare fully aware that ejecta blankets might exhibit selfsecondary craters and that CSFD’s must be interpretedcarefully when deriving absolute model ages. Nevertheless, assuming a minimum impact velocity vmin requiredto form a crater ([2] for example calculated values forvmin for two cases on the icy moon Europa to be 150 250 m/s), we should observe the first secondaries at acertain distance from the primary crater, while its closevicinity should be relatively free of secondaries.MPF and the lunar-like PF: Two approaches fordating surface units on protoplanet Vesta that differ intheir Chronology Function (CF) and Production Function (PF) [4, 5, 6] are in concurrent use. While CF’sof both systems are nearly identical for ages < 3 Gausing craters . 1 km [7], their PF’s are far from being in agreement mainly due to different assumptionsabout the impacting projectile population. This is notonly crucial when determining absolute ages of youngsurfaces since each PF predicts a different CSFD but forthe analysis of CSFD’s in regard to secondary contamination. For our analysis we use the latest revision ofthe lunar-like PF of [6] because it corresponds best withSFD’s of small craters measured on units interpreted tobe most likely free of secondary craters and that havenot undergone post formation modification processes.Cornelia: Centrally located at 9.36◦S/225.68◦E inthe western region of Vestalia Terra, the 16.53 km indiameter Cornelia crater is the largest, fresh appearingimpact crater on Vesta. It is primarily known for itsunique interior, which exhibits various peculiar featuressuch as pitted terrain [8], gully-like features [9, 10],Figure 1: CSFD of a 1 primary crater radius wide ring aroundCornelia. Red: Bins that follow the lunar-like PF. Blue: Diameterrange where secondaries seem to dominate over primaries. As a consequence, the CSFD steepens towards smaller craters owing to an inverse size-velocity correlation of ejected fragments. The plot aboveshows the results of two seperate randomness analyses namely a mean2nd closest neighbor distance (M2CND) and a standard deviation ofadjacent area (SDAA) [3] to demonstrate the increase in spatial clustering towards smaller craters.1712.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Figure 2: Derived N(1) values and theoretically derived ages forCornelia’s individual CSF measurement rings. Polynomial fits showan increase in age with distance, peaking at approx. 2.9 times thecrater radius from the primary crater centerfine and distinct mass wasting lobes or bright and darkabledo material within the walls but also for its extensive, bright ray system and dark ejecta patches, visiblein FC multispectral images [11, 12]. With a depth todiameter ratio of 0.28 it is much less degraded than themajority of craters on Vesta [13]. The fact that thesefeatures are almost in pristine condition and that thecrater itself is virtually not degraded, which is by theway not very common on Vesta, support the assumptionthat Cornelia is one of the youngest craters at that sizerange, which has had the potential to produce certainamounts of secondaries that could have contributed to alocal unrecognizable secondary population. In this case,Cornelia’s fresh ejecta blankets should be least populated by any secondary craters with the exception ofself-secondaries which enables us to investigate distantdependent changes of CSFD’s.Observations and Conclusions:• Distributions of small impact craters (. 1 km) investigated on units that are most likely not contaminated by secondary craters and that have notundergone considerable post formation modification processes on Vesta follow a lunar-like production function adapted to Vestan conditions.• Radial CSFD analysis around Cornelia and manyother fresh craters on Vesta show that power-lawexponents of the small diameter end of the SFD’sincrease with distance to the primary crater rim.At the same time the characteristic steepeningwhich is an indicator that the area exhibits morecraters than predicted by the PF rapidly affectsmore and more larger craters (Fig. 3).• Secondary craters only occur infrequently at leastwithin one primary crater radius distance from therim. Thus, precise dating of larger, fresh craters(& 3 km) using craters below 1 km in diameterFigure 3: Distant dependent changes of fit ranges and secondarycontaminated bins of CSFD’s around Cornelia. Its ejecta as a measurement area was devided in 4.13 km (1/4 of Cornelia’s radius) widerings represented by the thirteen columns. Various colors representdifferent parts of the CSFD’s resp. the bin sizes or diameter rangesaffected by the rollover, the steepening when secondaries dominateover primaries and the size range that follows the predicted lunar-likePF [?]. The dashed blue line indicates the increase of the crossoverdiameter below which secondaries dominate over primaries with distance from the primary crater rim, whereas the dashed red line showsthe increasing amount of shining through background craters.is possible within this area (Cornelia’s absolutemodel age of 4.29 Ma (Fig. 1) lies within the statistical error of the four innermost rings, see Fig.2). Nevertheless, CSFD’s should be interpretedwith caution, especially when plotting cumulative distributions that include obvious backgroundcraters by which a potential secondary signaturemight be obscured.• Secondary cratering on Vesta is possible. However, impact velocities must be slower than theescape velocity of the target body and higher thana certain minimum velocity required to producean impact crater (vmin < vsec < vesc). Thereforethe velocity interval and thus the percentage ofejected material that allows secondary crater formation is way much smaller compared to mostother bodies that have been investigated in termsof secondary cratering.References: [1] C. Russell, et al. (2011) SSR 163, 323. [2] E.B. Bierhaus, et al. (2012) Icarus 218, 602-621.[3] G. Michael, et al. (2012) 43rd LPSC (Abs #2486).[4] S. Marchi, et al. (2012) Science 336, 690-694. [5]S. Marchi, et al. (2013) PSS (in press). [6] N. Schmedemann, et al. (2014) PSS (in review). [7] D.P. O’Brien, etal. (2013) PSS (in review). [8] B. Denevi, et al. (2012)Science 338, 246-249. [9] J. Scully, et al. (2013) 44thLPSC (ABS #1578). [10] D. Buczkowski, et al. Icarus(in review). [11] V. Reddy et al. (2012) Icarus 221, 544559. [12] L. Le Corre, et al. (2013) Icarus (in press).[13] J.-B. Vincent, et al. (2013) PSS (in press).1712.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
	Introduction	Background	MPF and the lunar-like PF	Cornelia	Observations and Conclusions	References