1716.PDF
TEXTURAL AND GEOCHEMICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF FERROMAGNESIAN MICROKRYSTITE SPHERULES AT THE K/Pg BOUNDARY AND SIMILARITIES WITH CHONDRULES:  A COMPARITIVE APPROACH.  J. Belza 1*, S. Goderis 1,2, A. Montanari3, K. Roose4, F. Vanhaecke2, K. Baert5, P. Claeys1. 1Earth System Science, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, BE-1050 Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Analytical Chemistry, Universiteit Gent, Krijgslaan 281-S12, BE-9000 Ghent, Belgium,  3Osservatorio Geologico di Coldigioco, 62020 Frontale di Apiro (MC) Italy , 4Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, KU Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200E, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium; 5Department of Electrochemical and Surface Engeneering, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, BE-1050 Brussels, Belgium. (*Corresponding author:jbelza@vub.ac.be)    Introduction:  Spherules formed by meteorite impact on Earth are considered melt or vapor condensates from an expanding vapor plume (mixed target and projectile material) formed upon impact. Some authors have recognized that such spherules have condensed and crystallized to yield textures similar to meteoritic chondrules [1, 2].  As the variety of textures observed in chondrules results from a complex interplay between peak temperature, duration of heating, cooling rate, initial chemical composition of the crystallizing fluid and the presence of nucleation sites [3], individual spherules displaying textures similar to chondrules may record spatial and temporal variations in the P, T, fO2, and chemistry of a meteorite impact plume, putting important constraints on cratering dynamics.  This study reports textural and geochemical characteristics of a particular type of microkrystite spherules from the K-Pg boundary in the Umbria-Marche region, Italy. The K-Pg boundary, marked by the occurrence of a PGE- enriched clay layer, contains abundant 'goethite' spherules with quench textures and Ni-rich magnesioferrite spinel. The latter is the only pristine phase that survived diagenetic alteration, and it is presumed to be a major carrier phase of the PGEs in the K-Pg clay layer [4]. Consequently, to date, little attention has been paid to the spherules (altered) goethite 'groundmass', for which the precursor composition remains unknown.   Methods: Textural characteristics of the goethite spherules were examined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL model JSM6400. Quantitative wavelength-dispersive analyses were done using a JEOL JXA8530F Hyperprobe microanalyzer (EPMA). FeO and Fe2O3 contents of magnesioferrite spinels were recalculated assuming stoichiometry [5]. Raman spectra were obtained with a LabRAM HR Evolution (HORIBA Scientific) confocal Raman microscope. Materials were excited with a 532nm solidstate laser at 1% laser energy (20 µW). A New Wave Research UP193HE ArF* excimer-based laser ablation system coupled to an Element XR double-focusing sector field ICP-MS was used for the measurement of trace elements using a spot size of 100 µm.  Results and discussion: In the set of goethite spherules investigated, 5 types can be distinguished analogous to the different textural types found in ferromagnesian chondrules: I: Skeletal, II: Barred, III: Radial/Barred IV. Porphyritic and V. Granular. Skeletal spherules consist of abundant fine-grained crystals with little or no spinel. Radial spherules contain elongate crystals radiating from the edge of the spherules, and poikilitically enclose barred crystals. Abundant small, dendritic and skeletal spinels occur interstitially between the crystals and line their edges. Porphyritic goethite spherules consist of large, euhedral crystals and are often surrounded by large, octahedral magnesioferrite spinel (>10µm). Granular spherules host large euhedral crystals partially resorped in a glassy mesostasis.  Both textural and geochemical characteristics suggest that the skeletal, barred and euhedral crystals in the goethite spherules are pseudomorphs after olivine. Olivine is one of the least stable 'igneous' silicate minerals [6]. A common alteration product from olivine is iddingsite. Iddingsite has been used as a term to describe reddish alteration products of olivine formed in an oxidizing and fluid-rich environment [7, 8]. More specifically, it is a mixture of goethite and layer silicates that formed as crystallographically parallel aggregates thereby inheriting a large degree of structural orientation from the parent olivine [7]. Preliminary Raman spectra indicate that the barred, skeletal, radial and euhedral crystals have small but distinct peaks around 302, 406, 558, 680 cm-1 and a small broad feature in the 750-900 cm-1 region. Although the spectrum shows the largest similarities with the spectrum of pure goethite, the 750-900 cm-1 region may be a feature reminiscent of the characteristic olivine doublet with peaks at 850 cm-1 and 820 cm-1, attributed to asymmetric and symmetric vibrations of the SiO4- group.  The morphology of both spinel and olivine (pseudomorphs) seems consistent with established formation conditions (T, ∆T) for different chondrule textural types: skeletal olivine textures with little or no spinel 1716.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
indicate rapid quenching from a melt well above the liquidus. Radial and barred olivine co-occurs with small dendritic or skeletal interstitial spinel, indicating rapid cooling at temperatures above the liquidus curve in the presence of nucleation sites. Porphyritic textures consisting of large euhedral olivine and octahedral spinel are typical morphologies that rapidly crystallize in equilibrium with the melt at temperatures below liquidus. Porphyritic textures with partially resorped clasts indicate incomplete melting at lower temperatures. Goethite spherules are anomalously enriched in the most refractory lithophile elements (W, Zr, Hf, Nb, Y, Th) compared to CI-type carbonaceous chondrites and terrestrial values. Individual laser spot analyses indicate that skeletal and barred spherules exhibit the highest concentrations of refractories, followed by radial/barred spherules. Spinel-rich zones show the lowest contents. The goethite spherules show a relatively low, but flat, CI-normalized REE pattern with a positive Ce and a negative Eu anomaly and a slight enrichment in the HREEs. Trace element geochemistry suggests that the goethite spherules are a refractory condensation product from a highly heterogeneous vapour plume formed upon impact. Interestingly, goethite spherules with clear pseudomorphs after olivine (skeletal, barred) but lacking mangesioferrite spinels are enriched in PGE to the same extent as the 'magnesioferrite' spinel-bearing spherules. Little is known about the relative importance of ferromagnesian silicates as host phases for PGEs, but some studies indicate that olivine may concentrate iridium [9]. The enrichment of both Ir and Cr in spherules devoid of magnesioferrite spinels suggests that chromite inclusions in olivine may be responsible for the high Ir contents [9]. References:[1] Graup (1981) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 55, 407-418, [2] Sears et al. (1996) LPSC XXVII  Abstract #1165 [3] Lofgren (1989) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 53, 461-470. [4] Montanari et al. (1983), Geology, 1, 668-671 [5] Kyte and Bostwick (1995) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 132, 113-127. [6] Goldich (1938). J. Geol. 46, 17-58.[7] Eggleton (1987) Clays and Clay Minerals, 32, 1-1-11. [8] Keubler et al. (2003) LPSC XXXIV Abstract #1953. [9] Gijbels et al. (1976) Econ. Geol., 71, 1364-1370. Acknowledgements: J. Belza and S. Goderis gratefully acknowledge funding from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). We would like to thank the Association "Le Montagne di San Francesco" for logistical support in the Apennines and the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences (RBINS) for providing standard reference materials. In addition, we would like to thank O. Steenhaut and M. Raes for their technical support with SEM and EPMA.     Fig. 1 Textural types of 'goethite' spherules from the K-Pg Boundary. I. Skeletal, II. Barred, III. Radial/Barred, IV. Porphyritic, V. Granular.   1716.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
