1731.PDF
FIREBALLS IN THE SKY: IMPROVING THE ACCURACY OF CROWD SOURCED FIREBALL OBSERVATION THROUGH THE APPLICATION OF SMARTPHONE TECHNOLOGY.   J. Paxman1 and P. A. Bland2, 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia, j.paxman@curtin.edu.au, 2Department of Applied Geology, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia, p.a.bland@curtin.edu.au.  Introduction: Eyewitness reports of fireball sightings have increased in frequency over the last decade. The American Meteor Society recorded more than 3300 unique events in 2013 alone, a marked increase from 2300 recorded events in 2012, and a steady yearon-year rise from under 500 events in 2005. The 2013 figures include at least 92 events which were reported by more than 20 observers. Despite the large number of multiply reported events, there are few examples to date of meteorites which have been recovered primarily as the result of such eyewitness observations, and none where the observations have also enabled the reconstruction of orbits with any certainty. Gounelle et al. [1] determined an orbit for the Orgueil meteorite from historical eyewitness reports, however this calculation also depended on the prior recovery of the meteorite. The key elements required for a fireball observation to have reconstructive value are the location of the observer, the direction (altitude and azimuth) of the fireball from at least two locations along its path, and the duration of the visible flight of the fireball. Of these, obtaining an accurate estimate of direction is particularly difficult in an eye witness after-the-event report, as can be obtaining an unbiased estimate of the duration of a fireball [2]. A new approach to public meteor and fireball reporting has been developed, which makes use of smartphone technology, in particular inertial sensors and GPS to significantly increase the accuracy of reported locations and durations, and using animations of reconstructed fireballs to increase the accuracy of fireball duration and of qualitative observations including colour, brightness and fragmentation. A smartphone app, named Fireballs in the Sky, has been developed by Thoughtworks Inc in collaboration with Curtin University, and is freely available through the Google Play and iTunes app stores. The concept for the app formed part of a larger outreach initiative funded by Inspiring Australia in 2012 as a way of engaging members of the public with science in general, and with the work of Curtin University Planetary Science and the Desert Fireball Network (DFN) in particular. The DFN is establishing a network of cameras across Australia to enable the recovery of significant numbers of meteorite falls with associated orbits. The Fireballs in the Sky app gives users around the world the ability to collect their own data, upload it immediately, and receive rapid feedback on the observation, including corroborating reports, and orbitals. In addition to providing reports from areas where there is no network coverage, the app also augments the power of camera network internationally, as data are forwarded to relevant national organisations. Reporting sequence: Users of the app who wish to submit a fireball report will be guided through the following sequence when they wish to report a fireball: 1. Note whether a sonic boom was heard coincident with the sighting. A delayed boom heard later can be noted at any point during the reporting process.    Figure 1: The initial reporting screens use the phone sensors to record accurate observations of altitude and azimuth, and use a star background to give contextual assistance to users.  2. Point the phone towards the place where the fireball first appeared (see Figure 1), guided by a starmap background which can give important context for the orientation. 3. Point the phone towards the place where the fireball disappeared. 4. Report the duration of the fireball, aided by an animated fireball which traverses the screen in the specified time (see Figure 2). 5. Report a series of qualitative observations including brightness, colour, shape and fragmen1731.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
tation, again assisted by the animation which responds to the report.    Figure 2: Reporting of duration and qualitative features are aided by an animation of the fireball which responds to the report.  6. Enter any additional notes, and submit the report, which will include the GPS location of the observation, the altitude and azimuth orientations of the two observed points as recorded by the phone sensors, along with all of the other reported data. Reports are automatically incorporated into a database managed by the DFN. Observations which are reported in a similar geographic area and time are automatically grouped, and labelled as “corroborated”, while reports which are later verified by the scientific team are labelled as “confirmed”, and users receive feedback about their report through the app, which may include orbital information or projected fall positions. Corroborated reports are triangulated using a similar workflow to that applied to camera observations from the DFN. Improved error estimation: Prior efforts at tracking fireball trajectories from eyewitness accounts report error ranges in excess of 30° for both altitude and azimuth observations[3]. The resulting analysis demonstrates that the recovery of meteorites from such observations is very unlikely. The smartphone app approach enhances the quality of fireball reports in four key ways: • The use of phone sensors increases the accuracy of the observation, and also reduces the likelihood of observer bias in the estimation of altitude in particular. • The built-in starmap provides a key piece of context in reporting altitude and azimuth, as the fireball may have passed close to known stars or constellations. • The report is more immediate, performed onlocation immediately after the observation of the event.  This reduces the likely decay in quality of the observations as compared with eyewitness accounts, which may be delivered by interview days or weeks after the event. • The animation provides important context for duration comparison, since human observers are able to accurately perceive relative duration more accurately than absolute duration of short events [2]. The improved quality observations will reduce the expected error in observed atmospheric positions from tens of kilometres to less than one kilometre, dramatically increasing the probability of successful recovery and orbit calculation. Initial response: The app has received considerable attention in national and international media, including the BBC, ABC (Australian Broadcasting Corporation), Australian Geographic and numerous smartphone and astronomical websites. Over 4500 downloads have been logged in the first two months since the app’s launch, and more than 200 reports have been received in that time, including a small number of corroborated fireball sightings, however there have not yet been enough simultaneous sighting to enable triangulation algorithms to be tested. There is a need to significantly increase the deployment and awareness of the app in order to increase the likelihood of simultaneous observations of large fireballs sufficient to estimate orbits and fall positions. Conclusion: Fireballs in the Sky opens a new frontier in meteor and fireball reporting through the establishment of an international crowd sourced smartphone fireball network. The innovative use of smartphone technology significantly increases the likelihood of successful meteorite recovery and orbit calculation. Acknowledgements: The app was conceived by the authors and developed by Thoughtworks Australia in a close collaboration with Curtin University. The app is part of a larger outreach project Fireballs in the Sky which is funded by Inspiring Australia. Professor Bland is supported by the Australian Research Council under the Laureate Fellowship Scheme.  References:  [1] Gounelle, M. et al. (2006) Meteoritics & Planetary Science 41(1). [2] Allan, L. G. (1979) Perception & Psychophysics 26(5). [3] Tatum, J. B. (1998). Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada 92(78). 1731.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
