 Lunar Swirls and Plasma Magnetic Field Interaction in the Laboratory.   M. Dropmann1,2, R. Laufer1,2, G. Herdrich2,1, L.S. Matthews1, T.W. Hyde1, 1Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research (CASPER), Baylor University, One Bear Place 97310, Waco, TX-76798-7310,  2Institute of Space Systems (IRS), Universität Stuttgart, Raumfahrtzentrum Baden-Württemberg, Pfaffenwaldring 29, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany. Introduction:  At  the  Center  for  Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research (CASPER) at Baylor  University,  Texas,  a  GEC reference  cell  has been used to conduct experiments investigating magnetic field plasma surface interactions. The results of these experiments shall be used to help understand the formation of lunar swirls which are known to be located close to regions of magnetic anomalies.  Strong crustal magnetic fields can influence the lunar plasma environment  by separating charges  and  thus creating electric fields. This in turn can alter the incoming solar wind  flux  and  dust  transport  processes.  Experiments have been conducted to map electric forces in a plasma close to a magnet using dust as a probe. These experiments were conducted in preparation for future experiments  within  flowing  plasma,  representing  the  solar wind, which will be accomplished using the inductively heated plasma generator (IPG6-B) developed in close collaboration  with  the  Institute  of  Space  Systems (IRS), University of Stuttgart, Germany. Figure 1.  A lunar swirl known as the Reiner-GammaFormation.  Image  credit:  NASA/GSFC/Arizona State University. Lunar Swirls: Across various locations, the lunar surface  exhibits  light  colored  sinusoidally  shaped patterns which appear unconnected to any geometrical feature such as craters, valleys or mountains. Although these  albedo  patterns,  named  lunar  swirls,  are  well known [1] there is yet  no consensus concerning their formation. One example of a lunar swirl is the ReinerGamma-Formation shown in figure 1. To date, all swirls have been found in regions of strong crustal magnetic fields. Thus, it  appears likely that  these  fields  may be  involved  in  their  formation process. Magnetic fields which have a strength of more than  100  nT  can  interact  with  the  lunar  plasma environment, which is mostly fed by the solar wind. In this case, electrons are magnetized by the field and can not  penetrate  the  field  lines  while  ions  remain unmagnetized  and  can  enter  the  field.  The  resulting space  charge  regions  formed are  responsible  for  the formation  of  electric  fields,  which  can  shield  the surface  partially from the solar  wind flux. This  may alter  the  surface  maturation  speed  and  darkening. Additionally dust, for example the dust lifted from the surface as observed during the Apollo era [2], can be influenced  by these fields  and transported  across  the surface.  This  process  provides  a  mechanism for  fine grain dust transport, allowing such dust to accumulate in certain regions and change the surface albedo. Other theories  of  swirl  formation  persist,  for  example  the cometary impact theory [3]. Figure 2. GEC-Reference cell in operation with Argon plasma. Experiment: The  interaction  of  magnetic  fields with  plasma  in  connection  with  lunar  swirls  has previously been investigated by Bamford [4] and Wang [5].  Here  a  new approach  to  determine the resulting electric fields is introduced. In order to investigate the  magnetic field plasma surface interaction near the lunar surface,  the  problem  has  been  scaled  to  fit  into  a laboratory experiment. While scaling the problem it is important  to  insure  that  the  laboratory  plasma employed  is  collision-less  and  has  magnetized electrons and unmagnetized ions as is the case in the lunar environment. Experimental Setup. An Argon plasma is created in a  GEC  reference  cell  (figure  2).  A  cylindrical neodymium magnet with 6.35mm diameter and length is placed on the lower electrode to represent the lunar magnetic  anomaly.  To  represent  the  non-conductive lunar surface, a glass plate is placed above this magnet. For  diagnostic  purposes  8.89µm  melamine formaldehyde  (MF)  particles  are  dropped  into  the plasma. These particles are illuminated with a laser fan and the trajectories recorded using a high speed camera running at 1000 fps. As the particles charge negatively in the plasma they are subject to forces caused by the resulting electric fields in the plasma. Data Analysis. Based on the video data the particle trajectories are determined. By calculating the first and second derivative of the particle location the speed and acceleration  in  both  the  x  and  y  direction  can  be determined.  The  acceleration  can  then  be  used  as  a diagnostic  for  the  electric  force.  For  proper measurement,  other  significant  forces  like  gravity, friction and interparticle forces must also be considered in  the  analysis  as  well.  Unfortunately  even  after eliminating  all  disturbing  forces,  it  is  not  easily possible to determine the electric field strength as the particle charge is not well known and can vary based on location in the plasma. In this case, OML theory [6] is used in order to address this problem. Results: The results shown in figure 3 indicate the horizontal  forces  on the dust  particles  caused by the influence of the magnetic field. To obtain this result, a reference  experiment  without  a  magnet  was  also conducted.   The  results  measured  without  magnetic field  are  then  subtracted  from  those  with  magnetic field.  As a  result  only the influence of  the magnetic field  is  shown.  As  no  correlation  of  speed  and acceleration could be found it is assumed the friction component  of  the  force  can  be  neglected.  However, accelerations  caused  by  electrostatic  inter  particle forces are found to be significant and have not been subtracted  from the data.  This leads to an additional force that accelerates the particles away from the center line.  Figure 3. Electrostatic acceleration in radial direction. The data shows that a force exists that pushes the dust particles away from the center indicating a more negative potential in the center. In a region about 7 mm from  the  center  the  direction  of  the  force  changes leading  to  a  focusing  of  dust  particles.  Thus  the potential  in  this  region  must  be  more  positive, becoming  more  negative  again  when  going  further outwards.  Applying  this  knowledge  to  the  lunar environment, this mechanism would allow dust to be transported into preferred regions leading to an altered surface appearance. Outlook/IPG6-B:  In  the  near  future  further experiments  are  planned  with  magnetic  fields  under various angles as is the case for the lunar environment. Also  planned  is  the  use  of  the  inductively  heated plasma generator  IPG6-B.  This plasma generator  has been  established  in  close  collaboration  with  the Institute  of  Space  Systems,  University  of  Stuttgart, Germany. The plasma generator can produce a plasma jet  (plasma  streaming)  which  provides  a  better equivalent  for  the  streaming solar  wind  in  the  lunar environment. References: [1] Blewett  D.  et  al.  (2011)  JGR,  116, E02002. [2] Colwell J. et al. (2007) Rev. Geophys., 45, 2005RG000184.  [3] Starukhina  L.V.  and  Shkuratov  Y.  G. (2004)  Icarus,  167,  136-147.  [4] Bamford  R.  et  al. (2012) PRL, 109, 081101. [5] Wang X. et al. (2013) GRL, 40,  1686-1690.  [6] Fortov  V.  E.  et  al.  (2004) Physics-Uspekhi, 47(5), 447-492. 