1810.PDF
AQUEOUS ALTERATION OF CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES AND EFFECTS ON TUNGSTEN MASS DEPENDENT ISOTOPE FRACTIONATION T. Breton* and G. Quitté, IRAP, Université Toulouse 3, CNRS UMR 5277, 14 avenue Edouard Belin, F-31400 Toulouse, France. *Correspondence to: thomas.breton@irap.omp.eu.    Introduction: During terrestrial alteration processes, strongly mobilized elements such as Fe or Mo may present mass-dependent isotope fractionations [e.g. 1,2] because of redox reactions, dissolutionprecipitation equilibrium, microbial activity, or changes in molecular coordination.  According to recent studies, the 182Hf-182W chronometer also seems to be disturbed by aqueous alteration in - at least - some carbonaceous chondrite (CC) parent bodies [e.g. 3]. This is mainly due to the difference in solubility of Hf and W in the alteration fluids [4] and has potentially severe consequences on the HfW chronology of altered meteorites. In the present study, we report the first tungsten stable isotope data for CC and try to establish whether tungsten mass dependent isotope fractionations can be related to aqueous alteration processes. Various CCs (petrographic types 1 to 3) have been analyzed with some emphasis on CV3 chondrites as they are known to present various degrees of alteration going along with variations in textures, matrix abundance and metal preservation [5]. In detail, those chondrites are divided into two main classes: the slightly altered, chondrule- and metal-rich reduced CV3 (like Vigarano) and the more altered oxidized CV3 (including Allende). Oxidized CV3 present higher matrix/chondrule and lower metal/magnetite ratios, as well as Ni-rich sulfides (Ni-pentlandite).  Samples: Seven carbonaceous chondrites have been selected: Orgueil (CI, fall), Murchison (CM2, fall), Allende (CV3Ox, fall), Axtell (CV3Ox, find), Vigarano (CV3red, fall), NWA 3118 (CV3red, find), and an unclassified chondrite resembling a CO3.2 (provisional name: NWA 6446, find). Samples were provided by the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle (MNHN, Paris), the Field Museum (Chicago), ETH Zurich, and T. Breton. Noteworthy, Axtell is a find, but its terrestrial age is younger than 100 y. [6] and we had access to a fragment from the inner part of the meteorite, thus reducing the risks of terrestrial contamination. On the contrary, NWA 3118 and NWA 6446 likely present terrestrial alteration or contamination as the samples come from the sub-surface of the meteorites and spent a prolonged time in the Sahara desert.  Analytical techniques: We recently developed a new high-precision technique for analyzing W stable isotopes [7] that allows to reliably detect fractionations smaller than 0.05 ‰ per mass unit. Samples were carefully prepared by removing the potentially contaminated surface with a tungsten-free diamond-coated stainless-steel tool. They were subsequently crushed in a corundum mortar, before being digested in an acidic mixture. Tungsten was then separated from the matrix elements on an anion-exchange resin following a procedure detailed in [7]. Tungsten isotope measurements were performed at ENS de Lyon, using a Neptune Plus Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) equipped with Jet Cones. Both Jet Cones and standard cones were tested during the analytical developpement yielding identical results. The instrumental mass bias was corrected for using Hf as an internal standard (i.e. solutions were doped with Hf and the 178Hf/179Hf ratio was measured together with W isotope ratios to estimate the mass bias). In the following, the mass-dependent fractionation is expressed in δ per atomic mass unit (δ/ΔM, amu-1), where δ is the deviation relative to the NIST SRM 3163 W isotope standard in permil.  Results: Data are presented on Figure 1. Error bars (2SD) include propagation of the standard uncertainty. All samples are enriched in heavy W isotopes relative to the NIST SRM 3163 standard (from +0.04 to +0.58 δ/ΔM).   Fig. 1. Tungsten mass-dependent fractionation for carbonaceous chondrites as a function of their petrographic type. The grey field represents the range observed for 6 H-chondrites (H3 to H6) [7]. 1810.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Additionally, CV3 chondrites show large variations in their signatures and spread over the whole chondritic range. The W isotope compositions observed for 6 H-chondrites (from H3 to H6) are also reported for reference [7]. On Figure 2, the mass-dependent isotope fractionation of W is plotted as a function of the W/Hf ratio. This elemental ratio is used as a proxy for the Hf-W fractionation during aqueous mobilization, as W is more mobile than Hf [8].  Fig. 2. W stable isotopes fractionation as a function of the tungsten loss or gain, represented by the W/Hf ratio. W is mobilized by aqueous alteration while Hf is not. Discussion: At first sight, Figure 1 suggests that no correlation exists between the petrographic type of the various CC and their tungsten stable isotope signatures. Noteworthy, more or less severely metamorphosed H-chondrites are homogeneous in tungsten isotope composition, suggesting that the effect of metamorphism on the fractionation of W stable isotopes is limited, if any. Focusing on CV3 carbonaceous chondrites, the tungsten isotope fractionation seems to be related to the degree of alteration (Figure 2). Among the analyzed samples, Vigarano (reduced CV3) is the least altered, while Axtell is the most altered. The moderately altered Allende chondrite (oxidized CV3) plots between Vigarano and Axtell. Considering Vigarano as one of the most primitive chondrites, representative of the reduced starting material, we propose that the trend observed for Allende and Axtell is due to the progressive loss of W relative to Hf during increasing alteration processes on the parent body. The W-bearing solution resulting from the alteration is enriched in light W isotopes, and the remaining rock thus enriched in heavy isotopes as observed. In Figure 2, NWA 3118 (slightly altered CV3red) does not plot on the alteration trend: this may be explained by contamination processes, either in the Sahara desert or on the CV parent body. A re-deposition and/or adsorption of the lighter dissolved W would indeed result in the enrichment of the meteorite in W relative to Hf and move the isotope signature towards lighter composition [9]. The light signature of NWA 6446 may also be due to such a contamination. Thus, W stable isotope fractionation can be used as a tracer for alteration in CCs. The W/Hf ratio also appears to be a proxy for the extent of extra-terrestrial aqueous alteration in CV3 carbonaceous chondrites: the more altered the chondrite is, the lower the W/Hf ratio, indicating W mobilization. Still, the alteration trend observed for the CV chondrites cannot be generalized to the other CC groups without analyzing more samples. Interestingly, Orgueil (CI) presents a W stable isotope composition similar to that of the pristine CV3 Vigarano despite its lower W/Hf ratio, which could be explained by an isochemical alteration process in CI chondrites [10]. On the contrary, Murchison (CM2) plots on the alteration trend of the CV parent body, intermediate between Vigarano and Allende. Murchison and CV3 chondrites may have formed from similar starting material, and have been altered by similar processes, but at a lower water/rock ratio and/or lower temperature [11].  Conclusions: Up to 0.5‰ variability has been observed in the W mass-dependent fractionations among CCs and W/Hf ratios also span a relatively large range. We propose that these results relate to aqueous alteration processes experienced by the sample under scrutiny. The decrease of the bulk W/Hf ratio (or increase of the Hf/W ratio) observed for altered CC may explain the surprisingly young ages reported for the altered CR2 chondrite Renazzo [3], and puts the significance of 182Hf-182W ages of altered meteorites into question.  References: [1] Rouxel O. et al. (2003) Chem. Geol., 202, 155-182. [2] Barling J. and Anbar, A. D. (2004) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 217, 315-329. [3] Quitté G. et al. (2010) 73rd Met. Soc. Meeting, Abstr. #5417. [4] Breton T. et al. (2012) Miner. Mag., 76, Abstract #1514. [5] Mc Sween H. Y. Jr (1977) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 41, 1777-1790. [6] Simon S. B. et al. (1995) Meteoritics, 30, 42-46. [7] Breton T. et al. (2014) JAAS, in prep. [8] Lillard et al. (1998) J. Electrochem. Soc. 145, 2718-2725. [9] Kashiwabara et al. (2013) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 106, 364-378. [10] Bland et al. (2009) Earth. Planet. Sci. Let. 287, 559-568. [11] Brearley A.J. (2006) in Metorites and the Early Solar System II. 1810.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
