1811.PDF
ATOM-PROBE TOMOGRAPHY IN COSMOCHEMISTRY.  P. R. Heck1,2, S. S. Rout1,2, M. J. Pellin2,3,4,5, A. M. Davis1,2,3,5, D. Isheim6, D. N. Seidman6, 1Robert A. Pritzker Center for Meteoritics and Polar Studies, Department of Science and Education, The Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL. E-mail: prheck@fieldmuseum.org. 2Chicago Center for Cosmochemistry, 3Department of the Geophysical Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. 4Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL. 5Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. 6Northwestern University Center for Atom-Probe Tomography, Department of Materials Science & Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.  Introduction:  Atom-probe tomography (APT) is an analytical method that has considerable potential in cosmo- and geochemistry. Its combination of atomic level spatial resolution and analytical sensitivity is unique. This makes it the method of choice to study extraterrestrial nanoparticles such as meteoritic nanodiamonds or presolar grains that are too small to analyze with the NanoSIMS.  In the last five years we have applied APT to analyze such samples. We have successfully developed sample preparation methods and optimized analytical conditions for APT analyses of meteoritic nanodiamonds [1] and presolar silicon carbide (SiC) [2,3]. We have analyzed synthetic standard materials (synthetic nanodiamonds and SiC) to monitor reproducibility and accuracy. We continue to acquire more data on standard materials to correct for an instrumental bias apparent with carbon isotopic ratios. To improve tomographic reconstructions of APT data we will image APT samples with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Furthermore, we will analyze extraterrestrial materials that have not been previously studied by APT.  Methods: The APT is essentially a field-ion microscope coupled to a special time-of-flight mass spectrometer. The sample material needs to be located at the apex of a sharp microtip with a tip radius of <50 nm. Surface atoms exposed to picosecond UV laser pulses are field-evaporated and simultaneously ionized, accelerated and subsequently detected serially with a microchannel plate and a delay line detector. About 50% plus of all ions are detected. The instrument records the position and time of impact, from which the mass-to-chargestate-ratio for each detected ion is calculated. This allows for a three-dimensional tomographic reconstruction of the sample, atom-by-atom with subnanometer spatial resolution, [e.g., 4] and Fig. 1. We mainly used the state-of-the-art Cameca LEAP 4000XSi at the Northwestern University Center for Atom Probe Tomography (NUCAPT), Evanston, Illinois.  We developed two different approaches for sample preparation. The first one uses a dual-beam focused-ion beam (FIB) microscope to lift-out a sample section and attach it to a flat-top microtip and then sharpen it using annular FIB milling. The second approach consists of direct deposition of the sample material onto a presharpened microtip. This method does not require the use of FIB, but only works for particles a few nanometers in diameter or less. Due to the high mechanical stress induced by the strong applied electric-field during APT analysis, sample stability is critical for successful runs. Therefore, ion-beam damage during FIB sample preparation must be minimized and open pore space filled by atomic-layer deposition or sputter deposition. Details of the sample preparation techniques are described in [1]. Results & Discussion: Herein, we summarize results from our studies of meteoritic nanodiamonds and presolar silicon carbide.  Nanodiamonds. Meteoritic nanodiamond was the first presolar phase discovered [5]. Isotopic anomalies in Xe, Pd, Te, Ba were discovered in bulk analyses and can only be explained by neutron-capture reactions in dying stars [6–8]. The carbon and nitrogen isotopic compositions of bulk nanodiamonds are, however, consistent with the Sun [9]. Are these values just averages of a wide range of compositions or are they representative compositions of all nanodiamonds? Possibly, there are presolar populations of nanodiamonds intermixed with other populations that have an isotopic ratio consistent with an origin in the early solar system. To help answer these questions, a knowledge of the carbon isotopic compositions of a large number of individual nanodiamonds is required. Whereas TEM certainly has the spatial resolution to image individual nanodiamonds of 2–3 nm diam., and elemental compositions can be obtained with EDS, isotopes cannot be detected with any TEM technique, in contrast to APT.  We used APT to analyze individual meteoritic nanodiamonds from the Allende DM separate at sub-nm resolution (Fig. 1) and determined their carbon isotope ratios. Additionally, we also analyzed synthetic nanodiamonds employed as analytical standards. The standard analyses reveal an instrumental bias that needs to be corrected before obtaining accurate carbon isotopic ratios. Other limitations include the small number of atoms of the minor isotope 13C (1.1% of terrestrial carbon), which results in relatively large uncertainties. We have not observed any significant differences between the synthetic and the meteoritic nanodiamonds, but only a few samples have been analyzed . We discuss the results and the uncertainties resulting from this and other effects in a forthcoming publication [1]. 1811.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 1: 3-D-tomographic APT reconstruction of Allende nanodiamond sample sitting on a presharpened silicon microtip. Each dot represents a single detected atom. Elements are colored coded: carbon grey, oxygen red, silicon green. Carbon isoconcentration surfaces are shaded grey and highlight carbon-rich regions, representing nanodiamonds, clusters of nanodiamonds, and associated disordered carbon on the surface of the microtip. The aspect ratio and scale is approximate. Figure from [1].  Silicon carbide: Circumstellar SiC is the most studied presolar phase and the isotopic compostion of individual SiC grains is routinely analyzed by SIMS. TEM and NanoSIMS analyses reveal inclusions (“subgrains”) within some grains [e.g., 10]. These inclusions are studied with TEM/EDS and the larger ones with NanoSIMS. APT is the ideal technique to obtain isotopic analyses of inclusions uncontaminated with surrounding SiC that are smaller than the NanoSIMS’s spot size. A knowledge of the inclusions’ isotopic compositions is desirable for an improved understanding of their genesis and has the potential to provide information on stellar evolution. To demonstrate feasibility of APT analyses of presolar SiC we analyzed several presolar SiC grains from the Murchison KJE separate and also synthetic SiC grains as standards. Measured 12C/13C peak ratios of presolar and synthetic SiC are very similar; 29Si/28Si peak ratios of two of three grains are significantly lower than synthetic SiC, within uncertainties. Again, these ratios need to be corrected for the instrumental bias [2]. As the next step we will prepare site-specific FIB extractions of SiC with inclusions for APT analyses.  Conclusion & Outlook: We developed routine methods to prepare meteoritic nanodiamonds and presolar SiC for APT analyses. Atom-by-atom tomographic reconstructions and uncorrected isotope peak ratios have been obtained and quantification of isotope ratios is underway using synthetic and natural standards. Despite the challenges, APT is an extremely powerful technique with the potential to reveal the local elemental and isotopic compositions of extraterrestrial nanoparticles with subnanometer spatial resolution, in reconstruction volumes on a length scale of about 100 nm from larger samples. We will continue to develop APT for applications in cosmochemistry and will present preliminary results. Acknowledgements: This research is supported by NASA grants (PRH,AMD) and by grants from the Tawani Foundation (PRH) and from W. H. Ganz III (SSR). Atomic-layer deposition, UNCD film growth, and some of the FIB microscope work was performed at Argonne National Laboratory. Assistance with UNCD film growth and FIB work was supported by the US Department of Energy, Materials Sciences Division by UChicago Argonne, LLC. The  LEAP tomograph at NUCAPT was purchased and upgraded with funding from NSF-MRI and ONR-DURIP . This research made use of the Shared Facilities at the Materials Research Center of Northwestern University, supported by the National Science Foundation’s MRSEC program. The Initiative for Sustainability and Energy at Northwestern (ISEN) is acknowledged for grants to upgrade the capabilities of NUCAPT. References: [1] Heck P. R. et al. (2014) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., in press. [2] Heck P. R. (2010) LPS 41, Abstract #2112. [3] Stadermann F. J. et al. (2010) LPS 41, Abstract #2134. [4] Seidman D. N. and Stiller K. (2009) MRS Bull., 34, 717–723. [5] Lewis R. S. et al. (1987) Nature, 326, 160–162. [6] Lewis R. S. et al. (1991) LPS XXII, 807–808. [7] Richter S. et al. (1998) Nature, 391, 261–263. [8] Maas R. et al. (2001) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 36, 849–858. [9] Russell S. S. et al. (1996) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 31, 343–355. [10] Hynes M. et al. (2010) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 45, 596–614. 1811.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
