 CUBESAT MISSION FOR UV-VISIBLE OBSERVATIONS OF METEORS FROM SPACE: S-CUBE (S3: SHOOTINGSTAR SENSING SATELLITE).  R Ishimaru 1, Y. Sakamoto 2,1 , M. Kobayashi 1, S. Fujita 2, T. Gonai 2, H. Senshu 1, K. Wada 1, M., Yamada 1, K. Kurosawa 1, S. Hosokawa 3, K. Yoshida 2, M. Sato 4, Y. Takahashi 4, and T. Matsui 1, 1 Planetary Exploration Research Center (PERC), Chiba Institute of Technology (Chitech) (2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan; ishimaru@perc.it-chiba.ac.jp), 2 Tohoku University (6-6-11, Aza-Aoba, Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8579, Japan), 3 General Research Institute, Chiba Institute of Technology (Chitech) (2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan), 4 Hokkaido University.   Introduction: Meteors are a luminous phenomenon caused by the entry of meteoroids into the Earth's atmosphere at hypervelocity. Most meteoroids originate from comets and asteroids. So, the meteor gives us valuable opportunities of an indirect exploration of the primordial objects, such as comets and asteroids, in our Solar System. Although meteors have been observed mainly from the ground so far, the ground-based observations have weak points: narrow observational range and weather dependent. In contrast to groundbased observations, a space-based observation by an earth-orbiting satellite enables a continuous global observation of meteors. It has an advantage in estimating the flux of meteoroids colliding with the Earth. Furthermore, a satellite can access ultra-violet light from meteors, because the light is not hindered by the ozone layer. The meteor's UV light contains emission lines, which have not been observed previously by groundbased observations. As a result, it would offer new information about the composition of comets or asteroids. Carbary et al. [1] observed UV spectra from a meteor for the first time by using five spectrographic imagers onboard the Midcourse Space Experiment satellite during the Leonid meteor shower on 18 November 1999. Unfortunately, however, no observation from space has been applied since 1999.   Thus, the Planetary Exploration Research Center of the Chiba Institute of Technology (PERC/Chitech) has launched a CubeSat project to observe meteors from space [2]. The standard ~10×10×10 cm cubic satellite is often called a "1U" CubeSat meaning one unit, and has a mass of ~1 kilogram. A CubeSat project can be carried out with a reasonable cost, suitable technology, and effective manpower. Therefore, CubeSat has been a familiar tool for engineers to test new technologies in space and often used for Earth remote-sensing. With its successful missions to date, CubeSat is primed and ready to proceed with science missions, although use of CubeSat for astronomical and planetary sciences has been rare. We propose in this work to use a CubeSat in planetary sciences, specifically to observe meteors entering into Earth's atmosphere. We hope that our project can give a new direction in planetary science exploration.  Our satellite, a "3U" CubeSat, is called S-CUBE (Fig. 1). S-CUBE stands for Shootingstar Sensing Satellite (S 3). The S-CUBE is being developed by a partnership between PERC/Chitech and Tohoku University. We develop the 3Unit CubeSat S-CUBE based on the design of 2U CubeSat RAIKO that was developed and launched by the Tohoku University in 2012 [3].  Scientific instruments: The S-CUBE is designed to be equipped with one visual camera and 3 photo multiplier tubes (Fig. 2). The camera takes visible images to estimate the meteoroid size from the brightness of meteors. Also, the photomultiplier tubes (PMT) can observe UV emissions from meteors. The PMTs are attached with UV band-pass filters so as to extract emission lines in the meteor's light.  The camera has been proven in the flight of the CubeSat RAIKO [3]. The camera has a field of view of 37.5 × 27.7 degrees. According to our sensitivity estimate, the camera can image meteoroids larger than ~1cm. From the camera observation,we aim to estimate the size distribution of meteors. One PMT is designed to detect a singly ionized magnesium (Mg +) line. The line was detected as the strongest line by Carbary et al. (2003) [1]. From data of the PMT we aim to estimate not only the magnesium abundance but also the ionization degree. Detection of the Mg + emission is also used as a trigger of the camera. Because the ozone layer blocks UV lights from the Earth, detecting UV lights in the low earth orbit can be UHF receiving antenna Camera S-band transmitting antenna Photomultiplier tubes Deployable solar paddles Extendible gravity-gradient boom Fig.1. S-CUBE drawing  regareded as the occurrence of a meteor. The trigger makes it possible to capture only images of meteors.  Another PMT is designed to detect a neutral line of sulfur. Although sulfur in meteors has not been observed yet, an inclusion of the line is suggested because the line has been identified by the laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy in the ultraviolet region [4]. Because sulfur is a volatile element, the abundance of sulfur in meteors would give a indicator of the thermal alteration of meteoroids and thermal history of their parent body. Sulfur is also one of the most important chemical elements which make up biomolecules and, therefore, the detection of sulfur in meteors would be important in terms of Astrobiology.   Satellite bus system: The S-CUBE is equipped with two solar paddles which are deployed after release in orbit. Attitude control subsystem of the S-CUBE consists of magnetic torquers, deployable gravitygradient boom, and 3-axis reaction wheels. The boom can maintain an Earth-facing orientation, which make it possible for sensors (camera and PMTs) to point nadir direction during observation. On the other hand, the reaction wheels are not to be used during meteor observation. The wheels are to be tested for future missions to observe other planets. The communication system consists of an UHF receiver for command data uplink and an S-band transmitter for sending observation data.   Ground station: Communication with the S-CUBE will be conducted by a ground station at Chiba Institute of Technology: U-band uplink (400 MHz approx.) and S-band downlink (2 GHz approx.) with 2m diameter antenna (Fig. 3).   Orbital requirements:  Most of meteors occur on the leading edge of the Earth [5] where the Earth collides with dust producing meteors at hypervelocity. In addition, to take images of meteors, the observation over the night side of the Earth is required. Therefore, we wish to observe the leading edge of the shadow area. Another important requirement is our ground antenna location. Our ground antennas are located at the northern latitude of 38.2 degrees. A possible solution to meet our requirements is low inclination orbits except inclination smaller than 40 degrees.  Schedule:  January in 2013, our preliminary design was approved by third party professionals. We are developing the engineering models for the instruments and bus system. We are currently scheduled to begin flight model manufacturing in April of 2014.  After the flight model manufacturing, we are looking at a shipment date of January 2015. The launch date is scheduled in the Q2 of 2015.   References: [1] Carbary J. F. et al. (2003) Icarus, 161, 223-234. [2] Ishimaru R. et al. (2013) LPS XXXXIV, Abstract #1944. [3] Sakamoto Y. et al. (2013) ISTS, f-13, 1-6. [4] Radziemski L. et al. (2005) Spectrochimica Acta Part B, 60, 237-248. [5] Campbell-Brown (2008) Icarus, 196, 144-163.    System specifications Size W100 × D100 × H327 mm (structure) W113 × D113 × H340.5 mm (envelop) Weight < 3.99kg Orbit TBD Life 2 years Attitude  control 3-axis magnetic torquers,  gravity-gradient boom,  3-axis reaction wheels Communication uplink: UHF-band, 401.25MHz downlink: S-band, 2.285GHz Ground station: Chitech Power solar cells: ZTJ  2series×18parallels batteries: 6-cell NiMH (7.2V) Instruments Camera×1, Photomultiplier tube×3   Fig. 3. 2m parabola antenna at Chitech   Fig. 2. Camera and PMT  