1848.PDF
ANALYSIS OF POLYGONAL CRACKING PATTERNS IN CHLORIDE-BEARING TERRAINS ON MARS: INDICATORS OF ANCIENT PLAYA SETTINGS.  M.R. El-Maarry1, A. Pommerol1, N. Thomas1, 1Physikalisches Institut, Bern Universtät, Sidlerstrasse, 5, 3012, Berne, Switzerland (mohamed.elmaarry@space.unibe.ch).  Introduction: Osterloo et al., [1,2] identified and mapped many spectrally-distinct terrains within the Martian Noachian crust, which they interpreted to be chloride-bearing terrains based on the materials’ thermal infrared spectral properties. Additionally, they reported that the chloride-bearing terrains displayed cracking patterns of variable scales, which they interpreted to be potential desiccation cracks caused by the drying out of lakes or brines that ultimately led to the deposition of the chlorides. Follow-up studies have supported the initial interpretations using laboratory Near-Infrared (N-IR) and specific site studies on the Martian surface [e.g., 3,4,5] We investigated the chloride-bearing terrains using high spatial-resolution images, mainly from the High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) in order to assess fully the occurrence of polygonal cracks, as well as the possible phyllosilicates-chlorides relationship, which previous studies have noted. We use imagery from HiRISE to characterize the meterscale morphology of the cracks as well as their geological and stratigraphical setting in relation to phyllosilicate-bearing deposits. We identify and map the phyllosilicate spatial extent and association with the chloridebearing materials using spectral cubes from the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM). This work is part of an ongoing research theme regarding non-periglacial polygonal cracking patterns on Mars that are potentially of desiccation origin using mapping, analytical and numerical simulations, terrestrial analog field studies, and experiments on analog simulants [6,7,8,9]. Morphology and geologic setting:  Our investigation of the regions in Osterloo et al., [1,2]’s database that are covered by high resolution images yielded 68 locations that contain cracking patterns close to, or directly associated with the chloride-bearing materials. Although this value represents only ~10% of the global database, it in fact represents more than 75% of the locations that are mapped by HiRISE (Fig. 1). These results suggest that the cracking patterns are a common feature within the chloride-bearing terrains, and may represent an important clue regarding their formation. Out of the entire data set that has HiRISE coverage (86 locations), only 16 locations lack visible cracking patterns. The cracking patterns show a common morphology (Fig. 2). Almost all patterns are characterized by polygonal shapes caused by the intersection of fractures in an orthogonal or quasi-orthogonal manner, which is a common trait among tensional cracks such as periglacial, desiccation, and volcanic cracks [3]. The polygonal patterns are generally flat and lack raised rims or centers. The fractures themselves are usually 1–2 meters-wide. The spacing between the fractures (or polygon width) is highly variable across the global dataset and occasionally, within the same location.   Fig. 1. Mid-latitudes MOLA shaded relief map showing the locations of the chloride-bearing terrains on Mars as identified by [2, black). White squares correspond to the locations with confirmed cracking patterns within or directly adjacent to the chloride-bearing terrains.    Fig. 2. Typical polygonal cracks associated with chloridebearing deposits observed with HiRISE. The cracks are generally 1–2 m-wide and intersect in an orthogonal system to form polygons that typically measure 5–30 m in width.  Regarding the regional setting, the cracking patterns in the chloride-bearing terrains typically form within bright patches and occur as exhumed outcrops in plains or low depressions such as impact craters. 1848.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Additionally, they also occur within sinuous valleys. The cracking patterns can at times be seen dissecting or overlying dune-like materials, which suggests an underlying indurated mantle. These settings are consistent with [2]’s investigation of the chloride-bearing materials in general. The patterns show variable states of preservation that range from pristine, or freshlooking, to almost completely degraded, which could partly explain the absence of patterns in some of the HiRISE images covering the terrains. The variable preservation state doesn’t necessarily indicate differences in response to weathering conditions (i.e. variable composition) or various formation ages. Instead, it could also indicate a different exhumation age or a variable composition and weathering extent in the overlying deposits since many of the bright deposits appear to have been exhumed following their formation and subsequent burial [2]. Mineralogy and stratigraphy:  To characterize the mineralogical diversity associated with the chloride-bearing materials, we investigated further the locations displaying cracking patterns that have CRISM cover. Out of the 68 locations, 43 locations with various geological settings are covered by CRISM (~60%). Our investigation reveals that almost onethird (14 locations) of the fractured regions covered by CRISM have clear signatures of Fe/Mg-rich phyllosilicates. Based on our analysis of several of these locations in detail regarding their stratigraphical relations and spectral signatures, we have grouped these locations into 3 main classes in terms of the chloridephyllosilicate association and the composition of the fractured unit. These three classes are: 1) Fractured chlorides with no phyllosilicate signature, 2) Non fractured chloride-bearing mantles/crusts overlying, or in proximity to, fractured phyllosilicates (Fig. 3), and 3) Fractured phyllosilicates and fractured chlorides in close proximity. These classes will be presented in detail at the meeting. Conclusions: Our study indicates that ~75% of the studied locations display polygonal cracks that resemble desiccation cracks. Furthermore, we detect, spectrally, the presence of smectites in association with ~30% of the studied fractured terrains. Smectites are a special class of swelling clay minerals that can induce formation of large desiccation cracks. As such, we suggest that the cracking patterns are indicative of the presence of smectite phyllosilicates even in the absence of spectral confirmation. Our results suggest that many chloride-bearing terrains have a lacustrine origin and a geologic setting similar to playas on Earth in accordance with previous studies [1,2,3,10]. Such locations would have contained ephemeral lakes that may have undergone repeated cycles of desiccation and recharging by a near-surface fluctuating water table in order to account for the salt-phyllosilicates associations. These results have notable implications for the ancient hydrology of Mars. Furthermore, the morphologies and sizes of the polygonal cracks can be used as paleo-environmental, as well as lithological, indicators that could be helpful in planning future missions.   Fig. 3. CRISM (top, ID: FRT0000AB81) and HiRISE images (bottom, ID: ESP_016043_1480) of phyllosilicate-bearing terrain covered in parts by chloride-bearing mantles. (a): RGB composite showing the chloride-bearing deposits in red and clay minerals in green. Black box shows location of 3c whereas colored polygons show regions of spectra displayed in 3b. (b): The average relative spectrum of the phyllosilicate-bearing unit (green) shows deep absorptions indicating Fe/Mg-rich smectites. (c): HiRISE image that shows the bright and fractured clay deposits along with a non-fractured chloride-bearing material. Note the presence of exhumed bright and fractured exposures of phyllosilicates (arrow) beneath the chloride-bearing mantle, which is situated in local topographic lows between the phyllosilicate-bearing deposits.  References:  [1] Osterloo, M.M., et al., (2008), Science 319, 1651–1654. [2] Osterloo, M. M., et al (2010), JGR 115, E10012, doi:10.1029/2010JE003613. [3] Glotch, T. D. et al., (2010), GRL 37, L16202. [4] Jensen, H. B. & Glotch T. D., (2011), JGR 116, E00J03. [5]  Glotch, T. D. et al., (2013), LPSC, abstract #1719. [6]  El Maarry, et al., (2010), JGR 115, E10006. [7] El Maarry, M. R., et al., (2012), E&PSL 323, 19–26. [8] El Maarry et al., (2013), JGR 118, 2263–2278.  [9] El Maarry et al., this meeting. [10] Ruesch, O., et al., (2012), JGR 117, E00J13, doi:10.1029/2012JE004108. 1848.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
