1853.PDF
Lunar polar craters - icy, rough or just sloping? V.R. Eke1, S.A. Bartram1, D.A. Lane1,D. Smith1 and L.F.A. Teodoro2, 1Institute for Computational Cosmology, Durham University, South Road, Durham.DH1 3LE, UK (v.r.eke@durham.ac.uk), 2BAER, NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035,USAThe distribution of volatile molecules in permanentlyshaded polar craters remains a topic of great interest.Knowing what is squirreled away in these extremely coldregions would both provide an inventory of what was delivered to the inner solar system over billions of yearsand potentially provide a valuable resource for future explorers.One technique that provides information about thecomposition and structure of the near-surface regolith isradar. Both Mini-SAR on Chandrayaan-1 and Mini-RFon LRO transmitted circularly polarised 13.6cm radar atthe Moon and coherently sensed two orthogonal linearpolarisations of the reflected signal, allowing a full reconstruction of the Stokes parameters of the returned radiation. In this way, maps have been constructed of theratio of returned power in the same sense of circular polarisation as transmitted to the opposite sense. Large values of this Circular Polarisation Ratio (CPR) can implythe presence of low-loss icy surfaces.There have been disparate interpretations of radar reflectivity data for the Moon. Clementine discovered ahigh CPR return from the lunar south pole, but the inference of the presence of a significant amount of reasonably pure water ice [1] was called into question by subsequent analyses. These showed high CPR regions wherewater ice would not be stable and hence concluded thatrough surfaces were most likely to be responsible [2].The north pole CPR mosaic from Mini-SAR has beenused to show that fresh craters have high CPR both insideand outside their rims, as would result if surface roughness were responsible [3]. However, a set of "anomalous" polar craters was found that only showed high interior CPR values. Assuming that roughness is weatheredaway at the same rate inside and outside craters it wassuggested that the presence of water ice would naturallyexplain this observation [3]. Furthermore, the abundanceof these anomalous craters was higher at the poles thanat lower latitudes [4]. However, Mini-RF data show thatnon-polar anomalous craters appear indistinguishable intheir CPR distributions from polar anomalous craters [5].Also, LROC images show boulders within and not outside the rims of the non-polar anomalous craters [5].Topographical data from the LOLA experiment andsurface temperatures inferred from the Diviner radiometer will be used to shed light on what is responsible forthe high CPR measurements interior to the anomalouspolar craters.Figure 1: The stacked Mini-SAR relative CPR maps for33 anomalous north pole craters. North is to the top andthe map is in terms of crater radius rc.Figure 2: As for Fig. 1, just using the Mini-RF CPR data.Crater CPR mapsUsing 33 of the previously identified anomalous northpole craters [3], the Mini-SAR and Mini-RF mosaicsfrom the PDS were used to make an average CPR mapwith north aligned in the +y direction for each crater.The crater radii (rc) were determined from the LOLA1853.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
2DEM and crater centres in the CPR mosaics were foundby eye for each crater, because the available mosaicswere not orthorectified to a consistent base map. Stacking together the crater CPR maps in terms of their meaninterior CPR values leads to Figures 1 and 2 for the MiniSAR and Mini-RF data sets respectively. It is apparentthat the same craters give rise to very different maps inthese two cases. This is because of the different look directions typically being used by the Mini-SAR and MiniRF instruments, coupled with the dependence of CPR onthe angle of incidence of the radiation on the surface.Comparison with the LOLA DEMIn order to undo the effect of the incidence angle on theCPR maps, one needs to match the radar mosaic to theLOLA DEM. The currently available PDS mosaics arenot corrected for radar parallax, an effect that distortsrange distances when the surface being viewed is not flat.The impact of this is to delay signals returned from lowerparts of the surface, which are thus inferred to be at largerdistances from the detector. Consequently, the near wallsof craters, which are viewed at larger incidence angles,occupy more than half of the pixels in the craters in anunrectified map. The measured CPR increases with angle of incidence as shown in Figure 3, determined froma CPR mosaic that has been corrected for parallax beforematching with the LOLA DEM. This variation meansthat the distribution of pixel CPR values for the craterinterior and exterior should not be the same, even ifthey have identical compositions and roughnesses. Using CPR mosaics that are unrectified will exacerbate thisbias, creating even more "anomalous" craters where nosurface differences exist.The measured CPR differences between the insidesand outsides of anomalous craters imply more than justdifferences due to incidence angle effects. Figure 3shows how the variation of typical CPR with angle ofincidence changes with distance from the crater centreout to 1.5 crater radii. The CPR values for the centralregions of anomalous craters are indistinguishable fromthose somewhat outside the crater rims. It is only onthe steeper inner walls of the crater where significantlyhigher CPR values at any given incidence angle are to befound.Other considerationsThe relatively high CPR regions inside anomalouscraters show no strong correlation with the surface temperatures inferred from Diviner measurements. This isnot what one would expect if significant deposits of water ice were responsible for the high CPR values. Also,Figure 3: Variation of the median Mini-SAR CPR withincidence angle for the 33 anomalous craters. Different curves show annuli at different cratercentric distancesboth inside and outside the crater. Errorbars represent theuncertainty on the median curve.the anomalous craters have lower diameter-to-depth ratios than typical craters in the north polar region. Thisis suggestive that they are relatively young and maintainsome "roughness" on the steeper slopes, such as seen forthe non-polar anomalous craters [5].References[1] S. Nozette, C. L. Lichtenberg, P. Spudis, R. Bonner, W. Ort,E. Malaret, M. Robinson, and E. M. Shoemaker. The ClementineBistatic Radar Experiment. Science, 274:1495-1498, November1996.[2] D. B. Campbell, B. A. Campbell, L. M. Carter, J.-L. Margot, andN. J. S. Stacy. No evidence for thick deposits of ice at the lunarsouth pole. Nature , 443:835-837, October 2006. doi: 10.1038/nature05167.[3] P. D. Spudis, D. B. J. Bussey, S. M. Baloga, B. J. Butler, D. Carl,L. M. Carter, and M. Chakraborty. Initial results for the north poleof the Moon from Mini-SAR, Chandrayaan-1 mission. Geophys.Res. Lett. , 37:L06204, March 2010. doi: 10.1029/2009GL042259.[4] P. D. Spudis, D. B. J. Bussey, S. M. Baloga, J. T. S. Cahill, L. S.Glaze, G. W. Patterson, R. K. Raney, T. W. Thompson, B. J. Thomson, and E. A. Ustinov. Evidence for water ice on the moon: Results for anomalous polar craters from the LRO Mini-RF imaging radar. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 118:20162029, October 2013. doi: 10.1002/jgre.20156.[5] W. Fa and Y. Cai. Circular polarization ratio characteristics ofimpact craters from Mini-RF observations and implications for icedetection at the polar regions of the Moon. Journal of GeophysicalResearch (Planets), 118:1582-1608, August 2013. doi: 10.1002/jgre.20110.1853.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
