1873.PDF
SEARCH FOR PIGMENTS AS BIOMARKERS IN ROCKS FROM EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS OF THE ATCACAMA DESERT AND MOJAVE DESERT USING MINIATURIZED RAMAN SPECTROMETERS AND RAMAN IMAGING. P. Vítek1, J. Jehlička1, H.G.M. Edwards2, C. Ascaso3 and          J. Wierzchos3. 1Institute of Geochemistry, Mineralogy and Mineral Resources, Charles University in Prague, Albertov 6, 128 43 Prague 2, Czech Republic, petr.vitek@natur.cuni.cz, 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Space Research Centre, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK, 3Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, c/ Serrano 115 dpdo., 28006 Madrid, Spain.   Introduction:  Raman spectroscopy is one of the analytical techniques to be employed in future missions designed to search for life on Mars, for example, the ExoMars mission. A major question arises that, to date, remains essentially unanswered with only limited response in the current literature: What is the potential of a miniaturized Raman system to detect biomolecular life signatures dispersed in rocks? We used rock samples (essentially evaporites) from two deserts - Atacama and Mojave to assess the performance of two miniaturized Raman systems (785 nm and 532 nm excitation) in this context.  Raman imaging, which is a relatively novel Raman spectroscopic approach, represents another promising method for the analysis of geobiological systems and is an analytical tool important especially for terrestrial applications. We present here the Raman images of microbial pigments such as scytonemin, carotenoids, and chlorophyll, which allow us to monitor their distribution within the original host rock (halite and gypsum from the Atacama Desert).  The hyperarid core of the Atacama Desert (Chile) represents one of the driest places on Earth with an exceptional occurrence of microbial life coping with extreme environmental stress factors [1]. Hence the area is considered as one of the most important Martian-analog sites. The halite rocks and gypsum crusts have already been found to harbor diverse microbial communities in this area. Here, we present a Raman spectroscopic data, including Raman maps, complemented by correlative microscopic imaging using fluorescence microscopy, SEM-BSE and confocal laser scanning microscopy of the endolithic microbial communities within the two different evaporitic systems which are of importance in an astrobiological context – namely, halite and gypsum. The microbial communities are dominated by phototrophic microorganisms.  In the Mojave Desert (California, USA), a variety of recent evaporites have been found to harbour life in playas and salt lakes. These hypersaline environments include Lake Owens, Searles Lake and Deep Springs Lake. In contrast to samples from the Atacama Desert, representing extremely dry areas without any perrenial lake, the samples from the Mojave are evaporitic crusts freshly precipitated from the brines of perrenial lakes. The results have significant importance for the deployment of Raman instrumentation in the forthcoming ExoMars mission scheduled for 2018 and for other future astrobiologically focused missions to Mars.  Methods: The portable Raman spectrometers, Advantage (532 nm Nd:YAG laser, maximum power 100 mW, weighs 9 kg) and Rock Hound (785 nm diode laser, maximum laser power 12 mW, weighs 1.9 kg) by DeltaNu (Laramie, WY, USA), were employed for the evaluation of the miniaturized Raman instruments. Measurements were performed directly on the rock as well as on the homogenized, powdered samples prepared from this material – the effect of the sample preparation and excitation wavelength employed in the analysis are compared and discussed. Raman imaging was performed using a WITec system Alpha 300 R with a 532 nm Nd:YAG laser. Streamline™ Raman analysis using the InVia Renishaw microscope equipped with 785 nm laser was another method tested for rapid Raman mapping of the algal layers through the pigment composition on the transections of gypsum crust.  The Raman spectroscopic measurements were complemented by the microscopic methods, namely Fluorescence microscopy, Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy and Low Temperature - SEM-BSE.  Results: Microbial pigment detection using miniaturized Raman systems. From the testing of miniaturized Raman spectrometers, it has been found, that carotenoids can be successfully detected in homogenized halite from the hyperarid zone of the Atacama Desert. The halite contains formerly known cyanobacterial colonization [2]. Carotenoids were detected using    532 nm laser and in the case of homogenized halite powder, the stable carotenoid signal was detected through three independent replications performed on three different spots. Scytonemin was also detected, but just with 785 nm excitation and after specific handling in order to focus upon particular areas of interest (aggregates of cells) on the rock sample. In this case, it was possible to detect scytonemin just on the untreated rock, not in the homogenized powdered halite. The results dealing with the colonized halite from the Ata1873.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
cama Desert have been already published by Vítek et al. [3]. The same analytical protocol has been applied here for a wide variety of rock samples from extreme desert environments. These include evaporites from playas and salt lakes in Mojave Desert (Owens Lake, Searles Lake and Deep Springs Lake) including halite, trona, burkeite and thenardite/mirabilite. The samples represent salts recently precipitated from a brine and contain visually recognizable pigmentation (purple, orange, or green) due to pigmented halophilic microorganisms.  Raman spectroscopic data, obtained by the miniaturized Raman spectrometers show significant differences between the two excitation sources used, 532 and 785 nm. The system with 532 nm laser proved to be excellent for the detection of carotenoids. In the case of pigmented evaporites, the carotenoid signal was registered repeatedly in different replications by the system. On the other hand, no other organics have been detected. Using 785 nm excitation source, no carotenoids have been detected within the same samples and also no other organic coumpounds have been registered. Nevertheless, the 785 nm laser proved to be preferential for the detection of the mineral matrix itself, which is in contrast to the system equipped with the 532 nm laser. Raman imaging. The method is excellent for observation of cellular compounds inside the host rock matrix. The pattern of scytonemin distribution within the cyanobacterial aggregate from the endolithic position in halite from the hyperarid region of the Atacama Desert is definitely observed by Raman mapping of the cyanobacterial aggregates. The 2D Raman map of one of the black aggregates shows the scytonemin forming a cloud-like structure around the cyanobacterial cells and its variations in the distribution were cleraly observed compared to the carotenoid signals, which are the two pigments giving a Raman signal under 532 nm excitation. The spatially well-defined cell structures can be clearly observed, with the carotenoid Raman signal representing the cellular component, as well as the extracellularly distributed scytonemin around the cells. The Raman images of scytonemin are in excellent accordance with the information obtained by fluorescence microscopy and conventional point Raman measurements. The method of rapid Raman mapping proved to be excellent also for lower magnification images, showing spatial distribution of microbial colonies through the pigment composition in their microhabitat. Both organic and inorganic compounds are analysed at the same time, thus the method can be recommended as a valuable tool for future studies of bio-mineral interactions.   References: [1] McKay C. P., Friedmann E. I., Gomez-Silva B., Ceceres-Villanueva L., Andersen D. T. and Landheim R. (2003) Astrobiology, 3, 393-406. [2] Wierzchos J., Ascaso C., McKay C. P. (2006) Astrobiology, 6, 415-422. [3] Vítek P., Jehlička J., Edwards H. G. M., Hutchinson I., Ascaso C. and Wierzchos J. (2012) Astrobiology, 12, 1095-1099.  Figure 1: Raman signal of carotenoids as obtained by the miniaturized Raman system (532 nm) from three different zones within halite from a hyperarid region of the Atacama Desert: A: sample surface, B,C: two different interior endolithic positions. See more data from the Atacama Desert in [3].  1873.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
