1903.PDF
SERPENTINITE DISSOLUTION: AN ANALOG TO MANTLE-OCEAN INTERACTION ON EUROPA A. R. Taylor1, A. A. Olsen1, and E.M. Hausrath3 1 School of Earth and Climate Sciences, University of Maine, Orono, ME 2 Department of Geoscience, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV 89154   Introduction:  Interpretations of density data returned from the Galileo spacecraft suggest that the Jovian moon, Europa, is more complex than a typical moon because it is differentiated [1]. Europa is composed of a Fe and Fe-alloy core, a silicate rich mantle, a liquid water ocean, and an icy crust [1]. More recently, modeling using density and petrologic data analogs from Earth processes has proposed that the mantle is predominantly Mg-rich olivine [6]. When olivine comes in contact with liquid water under the right temperature and pressure conditions, a metamorphic process known as serpentinization occurs. Studies have suggested that early microbial life on Earth may have originated around chemically complex serpentinite hydrothermal vents [3,4,5]. It is likely that similar vents exist at the mantle-ocean boundary on Europa and, therefore, the interface may be suitable to host life.  Because rock dissolution is dependent on the chemistry of the local environment, it is possible that waterrock interactions could proceed differently in the presence or absence of life, leading to a unique chemical footprint of biota.   If life is present in Europa’s ocean, such a unique chemical footprints could be present in Europa’s liquid water ocean and providing evidence of deep ocean life.  Ocean upwelling, tidal flexing, and crustal ice recycling may allow for these chemical signatures, if present, to be transported from the deep ocean and preserved in the ice crust. The signatures may thus be detectable in surficial ice samples or from orbit.  Recently, the Hubble telescope detected two 200 km water vapor plumes erupting in the southern hemisphere of Europa [2].  The presence of this vapor would make it possible for a flyby mission to collect water vapor and identify chemical signatures related to biota-water-rock interaction. This study asks: a) What chemical signatures would be present under hypothesized Europan conditions in the presence of possible organic acids created by simple microorganisms, and b) can these biosignatures be differentiated from signatures created by interaction with inorganic acids or abiotic organic molecules? Experimental Methodology:  In order to address this hypothesis, laboratory batch and column dissolution experiments between serpentinite rock meant to simulate Europa’s mantle, and three different acid treatments are being conducted. These experiments will represent water-rock interactions on Europa under three possible conditions: 1) abiotic-inorganic (no organic molecules present); 2) abiotic-organic (organic molecules present that can be produced by nonbiological sources); and 3) biotic-organic (organic molecules present that are produced by microbiota on Earth). The dissolution experiments use a Mgserpentinite rock collected from Little Deer Isle, ME. The serpentinite is composed of serpentine (~77%), augite (~2%), magnetite (~2%), and chromite (~0.5%). All biotic-organic acids selected for this study are aliphatic compounds and vary as either long or short chain variety. These acids were selected based on their presence in biotically impacted rock dissolution on Earth. For example, citrate is commonly excreted by prokaryotes, lichens, plant roots, and fungi.  The abiotic-organic acids selected have been previously found in carbonaceous meteorites, showing their presence in the interstellar medium. Care was also taken to select acids from a variety of organic functional groups such as amino, carboxylic, and sulfonic acids. The abioticinorganic acids chosen are hydrochloric and sulfuric acid. Sulfonic acid was selected because of the high sulfur abundance on Europa whereas hydrochloric acid was selected as an inorganic control. Experimental Design:  Two types of reactors are utilized in this study; batch and column. Batch reactors are faster, require less rock, and allow for more temperature manipulation. However, they are not as representative of natural water-rock interactions as column reactors. Column reactors are large, difficult to adjust run temperature, and require a long experiment time to reach steady state; however, they more closely approximate natural environments. Batch Reactors. 250 mL polycarbonate flasks filled with 2 g rock and 200 mL acid solution adjusted to pH 2.6 are housed in a temperature controlled shaker bath to ensure sufficient mixing. 16 different acid ligands are tested at 62°C and 22°C. These experiments run for 28 days and are sampled for solution periodically. Column Reactors. Glass columns with an inner diameter of 2.5 cm and a length of 50 cm are wet packed with rock to minimize the formation of bubbles. Acid solution is stored in a 5 L carboy and fed into reactors via gravity. Outflow solution passes through a filter, and flows into a collection bucket. These columns will run for approximately 40 weeks depending on time needed to reach steady state and are sampled weekly.   1903.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Analyses and Expected Outcomes:  Solution is periodically collected from the reactors and analyzed for concentrations of Mg, Fe, Mn, Ni, Cr, Al, Ca, Ti, Si, and Co using Inductive Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Concentrations of elements under abiotic-organic, abiotic-inorganic, and biotic organic acid conditions will be compared seeking patterns of preferential release in the biotic-organic acids. Those elements that are preferentially released under biotic conditions are deemed biosignatures that may be observable in the Europan ice and ocean.   Acknowledgements: We would like to thank the NASA EPSCoR RID program and the University of Maine’s Graduate School for funding this research. Additional thanks are given to the School of Earth and Climate Science and Sawyer Environmental Chemistry Research Laboratory for providing the equipment and guidance necessary for this project.  References: [1] Anderson, J. D. et al. (1997) Science, 276, 1236–123. [2] Roth, L. et al. (2013) Science, doi:10.1126/science.1247051. [3] Russell, M.J. et al. (2010) Geobiology, 8, 355-371. [4] Schulte, M. et al. (2006) Astrobiology, 6, 364–376. [5] Sleep, N.H. et al. (2011) Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., 366, 2857-2869. [6] Sohl, F. et al. (2002) Icarus, 157, 104-119 1903.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
