1926.PDF
ESA EXOMARS ROVER PANCAM: PRE-LAUNCH LOCALIZATION MODELING AND ACCURACY ASSESSMENT.  R. Li1, S. Ostrowski1, D. Li1, G. Paar2, A. Coates3, J. P. Muller3, A. Griffiths3, J. Oberst4, Mapping and GIS Laboratory, CEGE, The Ohio State University, 470 Hitchcock Hall, 2070 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210-1275 USA, (ostrowski.20, li.282)@osu.edu, 2Institute for Information and Communication Technologies, Joanneum Research, Graz, Austria, 3Mullard Space Science Laboratory, Department of Space and Climate Physics, University College London, London, UK, 4 Institute of Planetary Research, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Berlin, Germany   The Mapping & GIS Laboratory at The Ohio State University, working with European partners, is in the process of expanding its Mars mapping software and expertise to support the prelaunch localization study using the ExoMars mission's Panoramic Camera System (PanCam) . The ExoMars mission is the first element of the European Space Agency (ESA) Aurora Exploration Programme. It is being designed to deliver the Pasteur exobiology payload to Mars by 2018 (ESA, 2008a).  The Exomars PanCam hardware consists of two wide-angle cameras (WACs) that will provide multispectral stereo images with a 34° field-of-view (FOV) along with a High-Resolution Camera (HRC) able to provide monoscopic 'zoomed-in' images with a 5° FOV. Data from this PanCam system will aid in: 1) precisely locating the landing site and rover position, supporting rover traverse planning, and providing contextual information about the rover within its surrounding terrain; 2) geologically investigating and mapping rover imaging sites; and 3) studying properties of the atmosphere and of other variable phenomena.  The main mapping products developed using this system will include: 1) High-precision, bundle-adjusted image/rover locations and pointing data of cameras. The accumulative errors are controlled and reduced by estimating the parameters within the entire image network.  2) Near-real-time rover localization. High-precision rover locations are estimated using all available images through an integrated bundle adjustment. The near-real-time rover location estimation (taking a few hours for initial positions and by the second sol for improved positions) can be performed based on the most recent images through an incremental bundle adjustment.  3) Timely landing site mapping products such as DTMs (Digital Terrain Models), slope/energy maps, panoramic maps, orthophotos, traverse routes, and a spatial database for measured objects.  In past years, we have analyzed the mapping and localization accuracy of the theoretical geometric model for the ExoMars PanCam through traverse field tests conducted along the Alum Creek Reservoir north of Columbus, Ohio. After testing with a short traverse, the hardware system has been improved to address camera stability issues by adding a new baseline subsystem that has strengthened the stereo camera baseline and enhanced and stabilized the camera separation setting.  At the Alum Creek field test site, a set of field tests were conducted with a variety of traverse lengths, the longest being 1 km. This test site closely resembles the surface of Mars in that its terrain is characterized by pebbles, sand and dunes. There are a few recognizable large rock features and/or sand drift markings that can be used as image tie points to track the rover's progress. Of particular importance to field tests based on actual mission conditions, this landscape has significant areas of loose sand, making it similar to areas on Mars where the MER Spirit and Opportunity rovers experienced significant wheel slippage. Wheel slippage makes accurate tracking of a rover's movements very important, as telemetry-reported traverse distances (based on wheel odometry) can sometimes vary significantly from the actual progress. The outcome of these tests was an improved data collection procedure, and estimated mapping and localization accuracy vs. various operation-relevant parameters such as traverse segment length, distribution and number of tie points, and trade-off between parameters.  This modified prototype system is now being evaluated over a longer traverse at the same field test site. An extended camera model study was performed to design this longtraverse field experiment, particularly in the use of the HRC (High Resolution Camera) with the WAC (Wide Angle Camera) data. In addition, a new camera calibration method was developed for rapid field calibration to check if the camera parameters had changed after in-lab calibration. This would allow a similar implementation of the camera calibration process during ExoMars operations on the Martian surface. In 2013, a long (1 km) closed traverse consisting of 20 individual imaging sites was conducted at the Alum Creek Beach site. This traverse was designed to achieve an overall localization accuracy of 1 percent. GPS data was collected for use as ground truth to assess the traverse localization accuracy.  On this traverse, 400 m of sandy beach terrain was traversed, with the remainder of the traverse following a sidewalk northwards and then back to the beginning point. The interim sites were approximately 50 m apart, as determined using natural features of the landscape as image-network tie points. Connecting the first and last sets of imaging data using tie points, the localization accuracy of the system can be precisely calculated. Data from these latest field tests are currently being processed and will be presented shortly. Final accuracy assessments will be made as the end of the project comes to competition this year.  1926.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
