 AN INTEGRATED  DIFFUSION AND THERMAL  MODELING  APPROACH  TO  DETERMINE  THE THERMAL HISTORY OF CHONDRITE PARENT BODIES S. Schwinger1, R. Dohmen1 and H.-P. Schertl1, 1Institut für Geologie, Mineralogie und Geophysik, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany. Introduction:  Carbonaceous  chondrites  are  a unique  archive  of  the  early  history  of  the  solar system  and  are  affected  to  different  degrees  by thermal and aqueous metamorphism on their parent bodies.  In  this  study  we  analyzed  the  chemical zoning of chondrule minerals in the CO3 chondrite Kainsaz,  using  diffusion  modeling  to  obtain information  about  the  thermal  history  of  the  CO parent body. As the metamorphic peak temperatures of CO3 chondrites are supposed to be relatively low, chemical zoning in minerals may be preserved from pre-accretion processes like chondrule formation.  It is  one  of  the  most  important  challenges  to distinguish if certain element and isotope signatures found  in  minerals  and  mineral  aggregates  were formed before or after accretion into the parent body. We developed a strategy to distinguish between these two cases and found a new method to determine the peak temperatures of parent body metamorphism by combining diffusion modeling with modeling of the thermal evolution of the parent body.  Analytical  Methods: We analyzed 17 fayalitic olivines and 5 chromites in  7 type II chondrules of the CO3 chondrite Kainsaz.  Chemical  analyses and EBSD  measurements  were  performed  using  a CAMECA  SX50  electron  microprobe  and  a  LEO (Zeiss)  1530  Gemini  FESEM (GMG  Institute, Ruhr-University Bochum), respectively. Chemical  zoning  and  thermometry:  We observe concentric but anisotropic zoning of Fe, Mg, Ca  and  Mn in  olivine.  The  chromite  crystals  also show concentric  zoning  in  Fe and  Mg,  but olivine and chromite are rather homogeneous in Al and Cr, which  indicates  high  equilibrium  temperatures  of 1300-1400  °C  [1]  that  probably  reflect  their crystallization  temperatures  during  chondrule formation. The Fe-Mg exchange between olivine and spinel is temperature dependent and can be also used as geothermometer [2]. As every analyzed chromite crystal is in direct contact to an olivine crystal, the zoning  in  chromite was probably controlled by the Fe-Mg  exchange  between  olivine  and  chromite during the thermal  history of these chondrules. The olivine  crystals  on  the  other  hand  are  typically surrounded  by mesostasis,  so that  we interpret  the concentric zoning in olivine to be dominated by the chemical exchange with the mesostasis. We applied various  calibrations  for  the  Fe-Mg  exchange thermometer, e.g. [2], using the rim composition of Fig. 1: Diffusion profile of Fe in olivine. the olivine and the variable composition across the chromite.  We obtained for the core of the chromite temperatures  approaching  the  crystallization temperature  as  obtained  from  the  Al  thermometer [1].  Towards  the  rim  the  apparent  temperature decreases  continuously and  reaches  a  minimum  at the chromite rim of around 500-800 °C, depending on which calibration is used for the geothermometer. Therefore  the  observed  Fe-Mg  zoning  reflects resetting of this thermometer at lower temperatures, consistent  with  an  earlier  interpretation,  where  the Fe-Mg  exchange  between  spinel  and  olivine  was used  as  an  indicator  for  the  extent  of  thermal metamorphism on the parent body [3]. Diffusion modeling: We simulated the zoning in olivine and spinel with a one-dimensional diffusion model  introducing  Γ=∫Ddt as  a  fitting  parameter, where  D is the respective diffusion coefficient, e.g., DFeMg for olivine. The value of Γ quantifies the total extent of compositional change of the initial profiles by diffusion  processes,  which  is  directly related  to the  thermal  history  of the  mineral.  The  measured diffusion  profiles  were  modeled  using compositionally  dependent  diffusion  coefficients according  to  [4],  [5],  [6]  and  [7]  and  the crystallographic  orientations  of  the  profiles determined by EBSD measurements. Olivine.  The  quality  of  the  fits  and  the consistency between the zoning profiles measured for different  crystallographic  orientations  and  different elements in olivine strongly indicate that the zoning in  type  II  chondrule  olivines  was  formed  by solid-state diffusion (Fig. 1). The total variation for the  obtained  values  of  Γ is  within  a  factor  of 10: 1.6*10-12 m² and 2.1*10-11 m² but the abundance of the Γ values form a Gaussian distribution as could be explained  by the  accumulation  of  various   errors,  e.g.,  produced  by  cutting  effects  and  the  fitting procedure  (Fig.  2).  Therefore  our  results  strongly indicate that  the chemical  zoning in  these different olivine crystals were produced by the same thermal history consistent with a value of log (Γ [10-12 m2]) = 0.91 ± 0.29. Chromite.  We fitted  the  Fe and  Mg zoning  in chromite with log (Γ [10-12 m2]) values of  0.67 ± 0.1 and  additionally  simulated  the  profiles  employing the olivine spinel thermometer [2] as a temperature dependent boundary condition. By this procedure we can  directly  couple  the  simulation  to  the  thermal history  as  the  form  of the  profile  depends  on  the cooling  rate.  The  measured  profiles  cannot  be reproduced  assuming  a  simple  cooling  history starting from the crystallization temperature but are consistent with slow cooling from low temperatures as expected during parent body metamorphism. Parent  body  modeling: We  calculated  the thermal  histories of parent  bodies internally heated by 26Al decay in different depths of parent bodies of different  sizes and with different properties using a one-dimensional numerical model. To test the range of  possible  thermal  histories  for  the  observed diffusion profiles, the integrated diffusion coefficient over  time  (Γ)  was  calculated  for  every  thermal history.  Plotting  the  Γ  values  against  the  peak temperatures  of  the  calculated  thermal  histories reveals  that  there  is  a  unique  relation  between  Γ value and peak temperature. This relation is valid for all  thermal  histories  and  almost  independent  from burial  depths,  parent  body  sizes  and  material properties of the parent body. However,  as  the  relation  between  Γ  value  and peak  temperature  strongly  depends  on  the  used diffusion  coefficient,  it  needs  to  be  defined individually for each respective diffusing process. Discussion:  The  combination  of  a geothermometer  and  diffusion  modeling  for  the chromite  crystals  indicates  formation  during  slow cooling  on  the  parent  body,  but  this  result  is dependent  on  the  assumption  that  the  olivine  rim composition is roughly constant and buffered by the Fe-Mg  exchange  with  the  mesostasis,  which  may also depend on temperature.  The profile shapes are consistent with this assumption and the quality of the fits and the reproducibility of the fitting parameter Γ for different crystals in different Type II chondrules strongly indicate  that  the zoning  developed mainly in  the  same  environment,  hence  after  accretion  in situ within the parent body. As there is a unique relation between  Γ and the peak temperature for parent body metamorphism, Γ obtained from the diffusion profiles can be now used Fig 2: log(Γ) values for olivine diffusion profiles. to  estimate  the metamorphic  peak  temperature of Kainsaz,  which  is 765±34K.  The  Γ  values  of the chromite  diffusion  profiles  indicate  a  peak temperature  of  646±11K,  but  this  temperature estimate  might  be  incorrect,  since  we  used  the Fe-Mg  interdiffusion  coefficient  for  aluminous spinel.  Replacing Al to a large extent by Cr within the spinel  structure should have some effect on the diffusion properties, but which is not determined yet. Thus the peak temperature determined by zoning in olivine  is  more  accurate  and  is  in  very  good agreement  with the  peak  temperature  estimate  of 726±29K  obtained  by  Raman  spectroscopy  of carbonaceous matter [8]. Conclusions: The  combination  of  diffusion modeling  with  numerical  modeling  of the  thermal evolution of the parent body provides an independent estimate  of  the  peak  temperature  of  parent  body metamorphism with high accuracy depending on the accuracy of the diffusion coefficients. Once the peak temperature is calibrated in  this way, any chemical zoning  observed  in  other  objects  can  be  now evaluated based on the known thermal history of the parent  body  and  pre-accretion  features  can  be identified. References: [1]  Wan  Z.  et  al.  (2008)  Amer. Mineral.  Vol. 93, pp. 1142-1147. [2] O'Neill H. St. C. and Wall V. J. (1987) Journal of Petrology, 28, 6, 1169-1191. [3] Johnson and Prinz (1991) Geochim. Cosmochim.  Acta,  Vol.  55,  pp.  893-904.  [4] Dohmen R. and Chakraborty S. (2007) Phys. Chem. Mineral. 34, 409-430. [5] Coogan L. A. et al. (2005) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 69, 14, 3683-3694. [6] Petry et al.  (2004) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 68, 20, 4179-4188.  [7] Liermann  H.-P. and Ganguly J. (2002)  Geochim.  Cosmochim.  Acta,  66,  16, 2903-2913.  [8]  Bonal  L.  et  al.  (2007),  Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 71, 1605-1623. 