 THE EFFECT OF POROSITY ON THERMAL INERTIA OF SEDIMENTS (Preliminary Results).  A. Baker1, A. Walling1, E. Yang1, R. Kang2, C. Vilen3, S. Hassan4, V. Puri1, 1Durham Academy Upper School, Durham, NC 27705. 1Durham Academy Upper School, Durham, NC 27705. 2East Chapel Hill High School, Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 3Chapel Hill High School, Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 4Riverside High School, Durham, NC 27712.   Introduction:  Scientists often use diurnal heating and cooling data of Martian sediment from the THEMIS instrument aboard the Mars Odyssey orbiter to determine the nature of sediments and other surface materials. Grain size and cementation of particles are important factors that affect the thermal inertia of geologic materials. On a barren planet like Mars, these factors can also signify locations where water was previously present. Scientists' models for analyzing THEMIS data often take into account only grain size and albedo (Jeff Moersch, personal communication, July 2013). The Mars Outreach for NC Students (MONS) program has, for the last seven years, experimented with other potential properties of sediments that might affect thermal inertia. The purpose of this experiment was to test whether porosity of sediments is a variable that should be incorporated into scientific models that use THEMIS data to predict the nature of sediments on Mars.  Analytical Approach:  To test whether porosity affects the thermal inertia of sediments, the experimental equipment, including heat lamps and infrared thermometers, was first calibrated. The infrared (IR) thermometers were tested to ensure that each gave the same temperature reading for the same surface; in this case, a blackboard. The calibrated IR thermometers were then used to confirm that the energy outputs from several high-energy reptile heating lamps (630 watts per m2, similar to the 590 watts per m2 the sun exerts on the surface of Mars) were identical by individually placing each heat lamp equidistant from a blackboard and taking temperature readings of the same location. Sediments were collected from Eno River in Durham, North Carolina, and were prepared by placing the sediment on sieves and washing away all the clay, dirt, and dust. Once dry, the remaining sediment was separated with sieves by grain size into "sand" (1-4 mm) and "gravel" (10-40 mm). The experiment was set up as shown in the diagram (Fig. 1). The sample container was initially filled to a depth of 12 cm deep to abide by NASA's 10-cm rule even after it was compacted. Once the sediment was poured, the bucket was not moved to ensure that sample did not settle and inadvertently change the sediment's porosity.  To begin the experiment, three initial temperature readings with the heat lamp off were taken and recorded. The heat lamp was turned on, and temperature readings were recorded every thirty seconds for one hour (a pretest previously performed over a twenty-four hour period confirmed that the first hour of heating and cooling provided an accurate model for longer test periods). After one hour, the lamp was turned off, and temperature readings continued every thirty seconds for the next hour.   The experiment was then repeated after compressing the sediment to reduce its porosity. To compress the sample and reduce its porosity, a bucket slightly smaller in diameter than the sample's container was placed inside the sample's container with its flat bottom resting on the surface of the sediment (Fig. 2). From the inside, the bottom of the top bucket was pounded repeatedly with a hammer for two minutes.  Results: Mathematical models for the data were calculated using Microsoft Excel and Logger Pro 3. The preliminary mathematical heating and cooling curves (with time as the x-axis and temperature as the y-axis) for both compressed and uncompressed gravel (Fig. 3) and sand (Fig. 4 and 5) were very similar, although the compressed samples did generally start and end at a lower temperature than the uncompressed samples.  Discussion: In this experiment, reducing the porosity of sediment appears to increase its thermal inertia very slightly. Further investigation is required to determine whether the difference is significant enough to be included in thermal models for THEMIS data. This was true for both sand and gravel samples.  There are several possible explanations for these results. One possibility is that porosity does affect the thermal inertia of a sediment more, but the equipment   Figures 3, 4, and 5 show mathematical models for the heating and cooling of gravel and sand. The x-axes shos time in minutes and the y-axes show temperature in degrees Celsius. The graphs model the fact that changing a sediment's porosity very slightly increased its thermal inertia. used in this experiment was not sufficiently sensitive to detect the difference definitively. Another possibility is that there must be greater changes in porosity than were investigated in this experiment for there to be a more significant change in a sediment's thermal inertia. It is also possible that the heat transfer gained in convection with compression was only slightly less than that lost in radiation. In this scenario, decreasing a sediment's porosity only increased its thermal inertia, or resistance to heating up, slightly, but did change how it heated up.Figures 3, 4 and 5 show mathematical models for the heating and cooling of gravel and sand.  Sources of Error: The room in which the experiment took place was air conditioned, introducing uncontrolled variables. Sudden flows of cold air from the air-conditioning and the opening and closing of the door were factors that may have influenced the data. To solve these problems it would be best to relocate to an area away from air conditioning vents and doorways. It is noteworthy that compacted samples consistently began each experimental run with a lower temperature than uncompacted sediment. If the night time room temperature rose above the final experimental temperature, the compacted sediment may have still been warming. This difference in temperature between samples may have affected heating and cooling rates  Additionally, while the results showed little effect of porosity on thermal inertia of sediment, the equipment used in this experiment was not sufficiently sensitive to detect the difference definitively.   Future Work: In the future, the experiment could be repeated with greater compaction (resulting in a greater change in porosity) and more sensitive equipment. If a conclusive effect of porosity on thermal inertia is found, future work could also determine whether it is significant enough to be included in temperature models. MONS could also investigate a method to achieve a uniform compacted porosity throughout the sediment or create temperature probes that could withstand the compression and measure the sample's temperature at various depths beneath the surface. It may be possible to perform similar experiments in a hypobaric chamber to simulate Mars-like atmospheric conditions.  Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Howard Lineberger, Samuel Fuerst, and Charles Payne for coordinating the MONS program. We also thank Dr. Jeff Moersch of the University of Tennessee, who is conducting similar research to design a model to best interpret THEMIS infrared data and has given MONS students advice throughout the project. Thanks to Dennis Cullen, math teacher at Durham Academy, for advice on calculating mathematical models of the data, and to Dr. Jay Baker for editorial assistance. Furthermore, we would like to thank the Burroughs Wellcome Fund for funding the MONS program. References: [1] Jeff Moersch, personal communication, July 30, 2013.  