1978.PDF
CALIBRATION ISSUES IN VISIBLE AND INFRARED SPECTROSCOPIC OBSERVATIONS OF MERCURY AT HIGH TEMPERATURE. Rachel L. Klima1, Noam R. Izenberg1, Scott L. Murchie1, Gregory M. Holsclaw2, William E. McClintock2, and Sean C. Solomon3,4. 1Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, USA, Rachel.Klima@jhuapl.edu; 2Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA; 3Department of Terrestrial Magnetism, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington, DC 20015, USA; 4Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, NY 10964, USA. Introduction:  The Mercury Atmospheric and Surface Composition Spectrometer (MASCS) Visible and Infrared Spectrograph (VIRS) has collected almost 9.5 million measurements of Mercury’s spectral reflectance since the MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft was inserted into orbit in March 2011. The VIRS instrument measures reflectance over a wavelength range (0.3–1.45 µm) that may contain electronic transition absorptions indicative of silicate mineralogy when transition metals are present. These wavelengths are also sensitive to space weathering and differences in regolith scattering properties. VIRS detector operating temperatures have exceeded the maximum expected throughout this time, requiring modifications to the pre-orbit data calibration pipeline. We here describe effects observed during hightemperature observations and the processing applied to mitigate them.  Overview of Instrumentation and Calibration: The MASCS instrument consists of two spectrometers, the Ultraviolet and Visible Spectrometer (UVVS) and VIRS, both of which are fed light by a Cassegrain telescope [1]. The VIRS wavelength range is separated into two detector channels: the visible (VIS), covering 0.30.9 µm using a linear silicon (Si) array, and the nearinfrared (NIR), covering 0.9-1.45 µm using an indiumgallium-arsenide (InGaAs) linear array. UVVS focuses on exosphere measurements with some targeted UV surface observations, whereas VIRS is designed primarily for surface observations. The Si detector maintains an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) even at higher operating temperature (≥30°C), but the SNR for the InGaAs detector declines markedly at high temperature.  A key part of the calibration approach is subtraction of background measurements that are collected periodically by closing a mechanical shutter. These measurements are interleaved throughout an observation to monitor changes in the background, composed of an electronic offset and dark current, with temperature.  A shutter cadence of ~25-90 s is typical, and short observations are monitored more frequently. A curve is fit to the background observations as a function of temperature for each detector element, providing a smoothed, modeled, dark level in units of raw data number (DN) (Bd). Radiance at the sensor (L) for a given spectrum and wavelength in units of W m-2 sr-1 µm-1 is then calculated as:  abundance of Fe is low, with an upper limit of 4 wt%, and the Tiabundance is less than 0.8 wt% (Nittler et al., 2011). Data fromthe Gamma-Ray Spectrometer (GRS) (Evans et al., 2012) corroborate the low surface Fe abundance and indicate an average northern hemisphere value of 1.9 ± 0.3 wt%. In contrast, sulfur isunexpectedly abundant on Mercury’s surface, with XRS and GRSmeasurements indicating a global range of !1–4 wt% (Nittleret al., 2011; Weider et al., 2012) and a northern hemisphere average of 2.3 ± 0.4 wt% (Evans et al., 2012).Multispectral imaging observations obtained with MESSENGER’s Mercury Dual Imaging System (MDIS) (Hawkins et al.,2007) have enabled Mercury’s surface to be divided into severalterrain types on the basis of morphology, stratigraphy, and colorvariation (Robinson et al., 2008; Blewett et al., 2009; Deneviet al., 2009). The youngest widespread unit, smooth plains, canbe further divided into high-reflectance red plains, intermediateplains, and low-reflectance blue plains (Denevi et al., 2009,2013). Low-reflectance material (LRM) (Robinson et al., 2008), distinct from low-reflectance blue plains, is generally associated withmaterial excavated by impact craters and basins. Also spectrallydistinct are a number of smaller units, including bright materialexposed by the youngest impact craters (Robinson et al., 2008);bright, relatively blue ‘‘hollows’’ (Blewett et al., 2011, 2013); andbright, relatively red pyroclastic deposits (e.g., Kerber et al., 2009,2011; Goudge et al., 2012).MESSENGER’s Mercury Atmospheric and Surface CompositionSpectrometer (MASCS) (McClintock and Lankton, 2007; McClintocket al., 2008) provides globally distributed measurements of spectral reflectance at a spectral resolution finer than and covering agreater wavelength range than the multispectral imaging of MDIS.In this paper we use orbital observations of Mercury’s spectralreflectance obtained with the Visible and Infrared Spectrograph(VIRS) channel of MASCS to constrain the mineralogy of Mercury,including the materials and phases that might host the smallamounts of iron detected at the surface. We also search for associations between spectral variations of surface materials and morphological units and geological processes; spectral evidence forsulfides, particularly in association with the hollows; and spectralevidence for the presence of water at the poles, such as hydroxylated minerals near polar impact craters with permanently shadowed floors.2. Visible and Infrared SpectrographMASCS (McClintock and Lankton, 2007) consists of a Cassegraintelescope that simultaneously feeds VIRS and an Ultraviolet andVisible Spectrometer (UVVS). VIRS is a point spectrometer with a0.023! field of view and two linear array detectors covering thewavelength range 300–1450 nm at 5-nm spectral resolution. A visible (VIS) detector is sensitive to wavelengths that extend from 300to 900 nm, and a near-infrared (NIR) detector to wavelengths thatextend from 900 to 1450 nm. Instrument temperature is modulated by orbital and seasonal variations in thermal load from Mercury and varies from 10 !C to >50 !C. The NIR detector is moresusceptible to increased background and noise from elevated temperature than is the VIS detector, so the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)of the VIS detector is typically at least 3–5 times greater than thatof the NIR detector, and the NIR SNR becomes progressively lowerat higher instrument temperatures.For this paper we used the calibrated MASCS data productsavailable from the Planetary Data System (PDS), and here we provide a brief overview of the calibration process with which theseproducts were created. VIRS measures the radiance of sunlightscattered from the surface of Mercury. This radiance, L, carriesunits of Wm"2 sr"1 lm"1 and is proportional to the instrumentoutput through the relationL ¼ ðC " Be " Bd " BgÞt! "1S! "ð1Þwhere C is the raw data number (DN) value, Be is a background dueto an electronic offset (in DN), Bd is the temperature-dependentdark current background (in DN), Bg is a background offset resultingfrom grating-scattered light (in DN), and t is the integration time (ins). The radiometric sensitivity, S, is defined as the ratio of the instrument output rate to a known input radiance as measured in the laboratory and specified in units of DN s"1 (Wm"2 sr"1 lm"1)"1. Theinstrument’s radiometric sensitivity, also known as the absoluteradiometric calibration, was validated by Holsclaw et al. (2010)from a comparison of observations of the star Sirius with Earthbased measurements; agreement was found to within 10% overmost of the spectral range 320–700 nm. Because of MESSENGER’shighly eccentric orbit and the associated varying heat load fromthe planet, detector temperature can vary substantially over thecourse of any single observation sequence. As the temperaturedependent background Bd constitutes a large fraction of the observed signal, especially in the NIR channel, it is critical that thisterm be estimated accurately. A combination of backgrounds Beand Bd was measured by engaging a shutter, which blocks light tothe instrument, every 5th, 20th, or 40th spectrum, depending onobservation type. A polynomial fit was used to interpolate the background output of each pixel as a function of temperature for eachobservation sequence. A residual offset, Bg, interpreted as light scattered from the grating, is present following background subtraction.This offset, assumed to be uniform (i.e., constant with wavelength),was determined for each spectrum by measuring the signal atwavelengths below the short-wavelength cutoff of the VIS channel.After calibration of the VIRS data to spectral radiance, we derived the radiance factor (often denoted I/F) by dividing by the predicted radiance from a Lambertian surface illuminated normally bythe Sun at the same distance:r ¼ LESun=pð2Þwhere ESun is the solar spectral irradiance (in Wm"2 lm–1). Weused the observed solar spectrum of Thuillier et al. (2003), convolved to match the spectral resolution of VIRS.To facilitate a direct comparison of absolute reflectance between any two measurements obtained at an arbitrary viewinggeometry, we employed a photometric normalization. Followingthe approach of Hillier et al. (1999), we modeled the dependenceof reflectance on viewing geometry, represented by the functionf, as the combination of a Lommel-Seeliger term representing isotropic scattering and a phase function to represent directionaleffects:f ði; e;aÞ ¼ cos icos iþ cos e pðaÞ ð3Þwhere i, e, and a are the incidence, emission, and phase angles for agiven observation, and p(a) is the phase function. A linear relationwas found to represent the phase function adequately:pðaÞ ¼ a0 þ a1a ð4Þwhere a0 = 0.0576, a1 = "3.52 ' 10"4, and the phase angle a is indegrees. These parameters were found not to change markedly between 400 nm and 700 nm, implying that any variation in the slopeof the line with wavelength (e.g., phase reddening) is small.Although phase reddening has been demonstrated previously forMercury (Holsclaw et al., 2010) from observations by MDIS andMASCS prior to orbit insertion, we consider the lack of evidenceN.R. Izenberg et al. / Icarus 228 (2014) 364–374 365 (1) where C is the raw data value in DN, Be is the background due to an electronic offset (in DN), Bg is gratingscattered light (in DN), t is the integration time (in s), and S is the radiometric sensitivity measured in the laboratory in units of DN s-1(W m-2 sr-1 µm-1)-1. Temperature dependence of the sensitivity has been measured  and for the Si detector is greatest at longer wavelengths [2]; adjustments for these effects is included in the standard calibration pipeline.   Data Coverage and Temperatures in Orbit: Collected over almost three Earth years, VIRS spectra provide near-global coverage at a spacing of several tens of kilometers. Detector temperatures in orbit vary from ~10°C through ~50°C, as much as 20°C above expectations. Despite the challenges presented by these operating temperatures, data from the Si detector are comparable to those obtained by the Mercury Dual Imaging System (MDIS; Fig. 1). Because of orbital constraints, observations at elevated temperatures occur consistently over the same regions of the surface (Fig. 2). To obtain global coverage, it is essential to include highertemperature data.       Fig. 1. (A) Simple cylindrical map (central longitude 0°E) of reflectance at 750 nm from VIRS, interpolated between adjacent tracks. (B) Reflectance at 750 nm from MDIS. VIRS coverage is denser in the south, leading to longer interpolation distances in the north. Several dark stripes resulting from improper closure of the shutter can be seen (e.g., red arrow). A       B  1978.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
High-temperature Issues: High temperatures have resulted in two major issues: (1) increased background and saturation of some InGaAs detector elements, and  (2) “sticking” of the shutter mechanism, affecting both the VIS and NIR channels of VIRS.  Saturation and background noise of the InGaAs (NIR) detector.  The most obvious effect of higher IR detector temperature is increased background signal. The increased background leads to some detector elements saturating as their wells are filled by thermal electrons, at which time they are insensitive to surface radiance. Because each detector element has a slightly different offset, saturation occurs at a variety of characteristic temperatures (Fig. 3). Saturated measurements are flagged as invalid in data records, and only unsaturated shuttered darks are used for modeling dark current for surface observations.   Fig 2. Visible detector temperature for observations across the surface. Hotter observations are centered near 0°E and 180°E; observations near 90°E and 270°E are generally cooler.     To manage data volume early in the first year of orbit, detector elements at adjacent wavelengths were binned by two before downlink. This binning resulted in corrupted values in the data records because the two elements comprising the bin often contained a valid surface measurement along with a saturated value. Binned observations were discontinued, and a calibration update was implemented to accommodate this effect. We identified the unique saturation temperatures for each detector element, and we used those values to flag binned pixels that include a saturated element as invalid. Work is also underway to recover the unsaturated portion of these binned measurements. Statistical noise also becomes greater with increasing temperature, particularly in the NIR channel (Fig. 4). For short observations at higher temperatures, this noise can strongly affect values measured during shuttered dark observations, leading in some cases to corrupted dark subtractions. Elevated noise at higher temperatures also implies a reduction in SNR. Improper closure of the shutter. During the hottest periods of operation, the shutter mechanism sometimes does not close when commanded to do so. One of the data quality flags included in the data records indicates which observations are intended to be shuttered, but this information is derived from commanding, and thus falsely reports closure even when the mechanism fails. This discrepancy has resulted in observations of the surface being included in the background fits for both VIS and NIR, with the consequence of too much background being subtracted. The majority of affected observations have been located and removed from deliveries to the Planetary Data System, but some remain in the delivered data, as evidenced by the dark stripes in Fig. 1a. Work is ongoing to improve detection of shutter closure failures so that files can be manually corrected or removed.  Fig. 3. Raw counts for selected InGaAs detector elements showing the increase in Bd with increasing temperature.   Fig. 4. Standard deviation of shuttered measurements for two InGaAs detector elements as a function of temperature. The standard deviation is fit by a third-order polynomial. Values at zero for detector element 104 indicate detector saturation.  Summary: Higher than expected operating temperatures result in decreased SNR in VIRS NIR data and saturation of some or all NIR detector elements. Given the increase in NIR channel noise as a function of temperature, users are advised to focus on NIR data acquired at lower detector temperatures (perhaps < 25°C), though the ultimate SNR of the data is a function of several variables, including photometric geometry and heliocentric distance. In contrast, despite high operating temperatures in orbit, visible-wavelength VIRS data maintain high SNR and do not saturate. At operating temperatures above ~40°C, the shutter mechanism sometimes does not close properly, affecting both detectors. Most of the affected observations have been removed, but users should be wary of visible-wavelength data with unusually low radiance values.  References: [1] McClintock W. E. and Lankton, M. R. (2007) Space Sci. Rev., 131, 481-521. [2] Izenberg et al, (2011) LPS, 42, abstract 2391.  1978.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
