1987.PDF
IN-SITU NANOSIMS MAPPING OF ISOTOPIC COMPOSITIONS IN THE CM2 METEORITE COLD BOKKEVELD. J. F. Snape1, N. A. Starkey1, I. A. Franchi1, I. Gilmour1, and A. Morlok1,2, 1Planetary and Space Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, U.K. (joshua.snape@open.ac.uk), 2Institut für Planetologie, Wilhelm-Klem-Str. 10, Münster, Germany.  Introduction:  In this study we have analysed multiple regions within a single CM2 meteorite, Cold Bokkeveld. Previous analyses of the same sample resulted in the identification of a number of D and 15N isotopic hotspots [1]. Similar occurrences of isotopically anomalous material in other chondritic meteorites [e.g. 2-4] have been linked with insoluble organic matter (IOM) known to be present in primitive extraterrestrial samples [3]. Despite these observations the processes responsible for forming such isotopically anomalous material are not fully understood [4-6]. However, it seems unlikely that the isotopic characteristics of the IOM are the result of a single formation mechanism, but rather multiple processes in a variety of environments [6]. To date, much study of organic material has been conducted on demineralized samples – investigation of the distribution and signatures of the organic material in situ, while fraught with contamination issues, will provide insight into the nature of orgnic matter associated with nebula and parent body processes.  Recent work has also identified trends between the bulk H, C and N elemental and isotopic compositions of CM and CR chondrites [7]. These trends have been linked with varying degrees of aqueous alteration. In this study, we discuss our most recent measurements in the context of such observations. Sample Description: There is a wide range of textural variability within a single 1 cm2 thin section of Cold Bokkeveld, reflecting the polymict nature of the meteorite [8]. Two main lithologies were identified (A and B in Fig. 1). Both lithologies contain a range of chondrule and clast sizes (from <10 µm and up to ~2.0 mm), however, the matrix of lithology A is generally finer grained than lithology B. Multiple chondrules were identified in the sample, of which, four were selected for more detailed NanoSIMS analyses (Fig. 1). Two of the chondrules (CB4 and CB6) exhibit typical porphyritic olivine textures, with forsteritic olivine grains, interstitial altered mesostasis and minor amounts of poorly characterized phases (PCPs; Figs. 2b-c). Conversely, CB1 and CB18 show more significant signs of aqueous alteration and are almost entirely composed of PCPs (Figs. 2a,d). In addition to mapping regions within chondrules and chondrule rims, a number of inter-chondrule matrix areas were mapped. These were all located in lithology A (Fig. 1). Analytical Techniques:  Back scattered electron (BSE) images were acquired with an FEI Quanta 200 3D microscope. These were then used to identify regions of interest within the sample (Fig. 1). C, N and H isotopic ratios were determined using a Cameca NanoSIMS 50L. Areas of 30 μm2 were extensively presputtered with a large primary ion beam (typically 50 pA) in order to remove the outer, most heavily contaminated surface layers. Within these areas, 25 μm2 regions were then mapped, collecting 1H, 2H, 12C and 18O using a 10 pA with the instrument set up with a MRP of ≈ 4000. Isotopic compositions were standardised with a synthetic organic standard (anhydrous 1hydroxybenzotriazole). Data were reduced using the L’Image software (L. Nittler, Carnegie Institute of Washington). All of the hotspots identified have deviation from the image mean value of >4 sigma.  Figure 1 - Backscattered electron (BSE) map of the Cold Bokkeveld sample analysed in this study. NanoSIMS maps were acquired in the highlighted chondrules. Lithologies A and B are also indicated.  Figure 2 - BSE images of the four chondrules which were analysed in this study. The areas mapped have been indicated with white boxes.  1987.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Results:  The bulk compositions of the areas mapped indicate a positive correlation between C/H ratios and δD values (Fig. 3a). The chondrule interiors generally have lower δD compositions than the chondrule rims. With a few exceptions the matrix areas analysed have lower bulk δD values and C/H ratios than the chondrule rims. δD hotspots were identified in several of the chondrule rims and (in greater abundance) matrix locations (Fig. 3b). No hotspots were identified in the chondrule interiors. Discussion:  All of the bulk C/H ratios and δD values plot along a trend towards the typical values for demineralized CM chondrite IOM values (Fig. 3a; [9]). As such, it appears that the matrix and rim compositions lie along a spectrum of altered silicate and organic material. This also provides a top-level check that contamination issues are minimal. The differences in bulk δD and C/H values between the chondrule interiors, rims and matrix areas may reflect different accretionary processes. The chondrules will have formed first followed by the accretion of the rims, which likely incorporated organic-rich materials (hence higher δD and C/H values). The lower δD and C/H values of the matrix areas when compared to the chondrule rims may be due to the more compact rim texture resulting in lower degrees of alteration. The relative number of δD hotspots in the chondrule rims and matrix may also reflect the incorporation of distinct materials. For example, the accretion of the matrix (after the chondrule rim formation) may have incorporated more material from the colder outer solar nebula in which isotopically anomalous IOM was more abundant [4]. Despite following a similar trend to the bulk CM data previously published [7], many of the Cold Bokkeveld areas mapped in this study exhibit significantly higher C/H ratios and δD values. This range of values may reflect the incorporation of different mixtures of organic and silicate materials, or could be due to post-accretionary remobilisation of D-rich IOM [5].  The latter explanation is consistent with the altered nature of Cold Bokkeveld that has previously been inferred, for example, on the basis of O isotopes [10]. The lack of hotspots identified in the chondrule interiors indicates any post-accretionary remobilisation [5] that occurred during alteration of the meteorite did not lead to significant movement of isotopically anomalous material to the chondrule interiors. Based on the data acquired, although texturally CB1 and CB18 appear to be more altered, they are not significantly removed from CB4 and CB6 along the alteration trend identified by [7] (Fig. 3a). Ongoing work includes the analysis of the C and N isotopic compositions complementary to the H isotopic data shown here. References: [1] Snape J. F. et al. (2013) LPS XLIV, abstract no. 1913. [2] Busemann H. et al. (2006) Science, 312, 727-730. [3] Nakamura-Messenger K. et al. (2006) Science, 314, 1439-1442. [4] Remusat L. et al. (2010) ApJ, 713, 1048-1058. [5] Alexander C. M. O’D. et al. (2010) GCA, 74, 4417-4437. [6] De Gregorio B. T. et al. (2013) MAPS, 48, 904-928. [7] Alexander C. M. O'D et al. (2013) GCA, 123, 244-260. [8] Greenwood R. C. et al. (1994) GCA, 58, 1913-1935. [9] Alexander C. M. O’D. et al. (2007) GCA, 71, 4380-4403. [10] Clayton R. N. and Mayeda T. K. (1999) GCA, 63, 2089-2104. Figure 3 - (a) Bulk C/H (wt.%) vs. δD (‰) values within the mapped areas. The grey field indicates the bulk compositions of multiple CM chondrites [7]. The alteration trend identified by [7] and the direction towards average CM chondrite IOM values [9] have both been indicated. (b) C/H (wt.%) vs. δD (‰) of hotspots identified within the matrix of Cold Bokkeveld and the rims of the four chondrules analysed. Data are compared with the maximum hotspot values identified previously in Cold Bokkeveld [4], Murchison [2,4] and Bells [2]. The error bars represent 2σ errors.   1987.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
