1993.PDF
A NEW MODEL FOR THE (GEO)MAGNETIC FIELD SPECTRUM TO ESTIMATE THE RADIUS OF PLANETARY DYNAMOS.  B. Langlais1, H. Amit1, H. Larnier1,2, E. Thébault3, and A. Mocquet1, 1  Laboratoire de Planétologie et Géodynamique, CNRS and Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, benoit.langlais_at_univnantes.fr, 2 Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg, CNRS and Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3 Insitut de Physique du Globe de Paris and CNRS, Paris, France.   Introduction:  Planetary internal structure may be gleaned from magnetic field measurements. Electromagnetic studies can indeed provide information about the electrical conductivity of internal layers [1, 2]. The behavior of the so-called spatial power spectrum Rn [3] of the (geo)magnetic field can also be studied. This quantity represents the energy of the magnetic field for a given spherical harmonics (SH) degree n. In the case of the Earth it has been observed that the magnetic power spectrum has two distinct behaviors: for SH degrees larger than n = 13 the spectrum is almost flat at the Earth’s surface, while for lower n, the spectrum becomes almost flat when downward continued at the Core Mantle Boundary (CMB). This well-known property provides an alternative way to estimate the size of the dynamo region, i.e., the depth at which the magnetic power spectrum becomes flat.  In this study we re-examine this postulate and report on two new expressions for the (geo)magnetic field power spectra which are actually expected to be flat and independent of n immediately above the magnetic sources. These are the non-zonal (non axisymmetric) spectrum and the quadrupole family (n + m even) spectrum. These expressions are tested and compared to previously proposed ones to estimate what is the radius of the dynamo on the Earth, i.e., the radius of the liquid core. We predict a value which is within 10 km of the seismic core radius. Our formalism is then applied to infer the radius of the dynamo regions on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. The axisymmetric nature of the magnetic field of Saturn prevents the use of the non-zonal form. For the three other planets both expressions converge and offer independent constraints on the internal structure of these planets. Statistical forms of the magnetic field power spectrum: The shape of the spectrum associated with the core field is empirically approximated by a power law [4] Rnpl(r) = A∙Bn, where r denotes the radius. The ‘magnetic’ radius is found by solving ln (Rn(r)) = constant. A different expression is the McLeod’s rule [5,6], namely Rnmc(r) = K(n+½)/[n(n+1)](r/a)(2n+4), where a is the planetary radius. Again, the magnetic radius can be estimated by looking for which value of r the logarithm of this expression is constant.  Here we introduce two new expressions. The first comes from that time-averaged paleomagnetic field models indicate that the magnetic field is mostly axisymmetric [7] and that non-zonal terms are weak and tend to average out. The non-zonal field can thus be seen as random at a given time, and when converted into SH, its spectrum has a null slope. We therefore propose that the non-zonal part of the spectrum Rnnz (r) (i.e. terms with m ≠ 0) is independent of n at the CMB. The second expression is based on estimates of the magnitude of the Coriolis force with respect to the viscous and inertial forces, which suggest that the dynamics within Earth’s outer core is strongly dominated by rotational effects [8]. This leads to a dominantly anti-symmetric field, and the remaining symmetric field constitutes the part of the spectrum which has a null slope. This motivates examining the quadrupole family spectrum Rnqf (r) (i.e., n + m even). The four expressions are shown in Fig. 1.   Fig. 1 – Geomagnetic field spectrum at the CMB, and predicted ones for the power law and McLeod’s rule (upper left), non-zonal (upper right) and quadrupole family (lower right). Dotted lines are zonal and dipole family, respectively.  Tests of the expressions: The two new expressions are tested and compared to the two previously proposed ones using SH models of the geomagnetic field. Two kinds of tests are performed. First we estimate the misfit at the seismic CMB between the actual values of the geomagnetic spatial power spectrum and the predicted ones. Second we estimate how accurately the analytical expressions predict the magnetic core radius.  The magnetic field model CHAOS is used [9]. We test the various expressions vs. the minimum or maximum truncation degree. We show on Fig. 2 the results of the core radius estimate for an increasing truncation degree. The two new expressions offer better results for both the core radius and the misfit at the CMB. The magnetic estimate of the core radius using the nonzonal and quadrupole family expressions are 3486.6 and 3496.6 km, respectively. The error is one order of 1993.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
magnitude lower than with the other expressions. An important result is that both new expressions converge. The results do not significantly change for a varying minimum truncation degree. We do not observe any time variation, for this model or for other models, except when the model is known to be less resolved for older epochs.   Fig. 2 – Relative error on core radius estimate for an increasing maximum truncation degree Nmax. Black: power law, purple: McLeod’s rule, blue: non-zonal, red: quadrupole family. Application to giant gas planets: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are the only other planets possessing an internally generated magnetic field and for which there exist SH models of their magnetic field.  The interior of Jupiter is commonly described by a three-layer structure, with a deep-seated core, a surrounding envelope of metallic hydrogen and an outermost layer of molecular hydrogen [10]. The inner core is solid, and smaller than 0.15 Rj (Jupiter radius). The metallic hydrogen layer is the most likely source of the Jovian dynamo. Under the large pressure inside the deep interior of Jupiter, it is indeed expected that hydrogen is present in the form of a metallic liquid. The transition between the molecular and metallic hydrogen layers is not sharp. Different studies place the depth at which this transition occurs between 0.73 and 0.90 Rj [11-13], with a transition layer of up to 0.1 Rj. The Jovian system has been flown by several missions between 1973 and 2003. In a recent work [14] all existing measurements within 12 Rj of the planet were combined and integrated into a single model. Due to data coverage, SH models of the Jovimagnetic field are limited in terms of their maximum degree. The model is time dependent and contains both main field and secular variation Gauss coefficients. The secular variation is considered to be reliable up to n = 2, and up to n = 5 for the main field. The magnetic power spectrum of this model is shown at Jupiter’s surface in Fig. 3, together with the non-zonal and quadrupole family fits. For Nmax = 5 the spectra become flat at a radius of 0.88 Rj. This independent estimate is very close to the upper value of the molecular to metallic transition radius, and may thus be used to further discriminate between different interior models of Jupiter. The interior of Saturn is thought to be very similar to that of Jupiter. The radius at which the molecularto-metallic transition of hydrogen takes place is generally located close to 0.6 Rs [11,15]. The dynamo has its origin in the metallic hydrogen shell, but it is uncertain whether the entire metallic hydrogen layer convects. The magnetic field of Saturn is very axysymmetric [16] and the non-zonal expression cannot be used. The quadrupole family predicts that the dynamo is confined to the deepest layer, below 0.23 Rs.    Fig 3. – (a) magnetic field spectrum at Jupiter’s surface. (b) non-zonal and (c) quadrupole family spectra at estimated dynamo radius (for Nmax=5) between n=1 and 6.                       1      2      3      4      5      6 In the case of Uranus and Neptune, there is no molecular-to-metallic transition of hydrogen [17]. Two homogeneous envelopes of hydrogen and helium surround a solid rocky core. The inner and outer envelopes differ by their fraction of heavy elements [18]. The dynamo of these two planets is probably located inside the inner envelopes, where the icy phases are thought to become electrically conductive. Using the models of [19], the top of dynamo of Uranus would be between 0.66 and 0.86 Ru, and that of Neptune would be close to 0.95 Rn. This is consistent with other studies, and very promising for the future when SH models of the magnetic field of Mercury and of Ganymede will be available.  References: [1] Verhoeven O. et al. (2009) JGR, 114. [2] Civet, F. and Tarits, P. (2013) PSS, 84. [3] Lowes, F. (1966) JGR, 71. [4] Lowes, F. (1974) GJRAS, 36. [5] McLeod, M. (1996) JGR, 101. [6] Voorhies, C. et al. (2002) JGR, 107. [7] Kono, M. et al. (2000), JGR, 105.  [8] Olson, P. (2007) ToG, 8. [9] Olsen N. et al. (2010) PSS, 62. [10] Guillot, T. (2005), AREPS, 33. [11] Gudkova T. and Zharkov V. (1999) PSS, 47. [12] Guillot, T. (1999) PSS, 47. [13] Saumon, D. and Guillot, T. (2004) AJL, 609. [14] Ridley, V. (2012), PhD, Univ. Liverpool. [15] Fortney, J. (2007) ASS, 67. [16] Cao, H. et al. (2012) Icarus, 221. [17] Hubbard, W. et al. (1995). [18] Nettelmann, N. et al. (2013) PSS, 77. [19] Holme, R. and Bloxham, J. (1996), JGR, 101. Additional Information:  We acknowledge CNES for their financial support during the preparation of Swarm and JUICE missions.  1993.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
