 Large impacts on airless bodies: the Himeros event on Eros.  A.L. Tonge1, K.T. Ramesh1, O.S. Barnouin2,3, 1The Johns Hopkins University, Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute, Latrobe Hall Room 223, Baltimore MD, 21218 (ramesh@jhu.edu). 2The Johns Hopkins University, Dept. of Earth & Planetary Science, Baltimore, MD, 3The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHUAPL), Laurel, MD.    Introduction: The formation of large impact craters on an asteroid can provide insights into its internal structure. Craters can expose material from the interior of the body at the impact site [e.g., 1], and the impact sends stress waves throughout the body, which interrogate the asteroid's interior. Through a complex interplay of processes, such impacts can result in a variety of motions, the consequence of which may appear as lineaments that are exposed over all or portions of the asteroids surface [e.g., 2, 3]. The propagation of stress waves through the bulk of an asteroid is effected by the internal porosity. It is also true, however, that the dilation processes that are developed during dynamic damage evolution after impact can generate internal porosity. Thus prior impacts can modify the internal structure of a small body and affect the response to subsequent impacts. The difficulty is in determining the surface signatures of distant impact events.  We present a new modeling technique that describes the consequences of the cratering on  asteroids. Key physics in the material model: Material failure is modeled through a micromechanics based damage model related to the model discussed in Tonge et al. [4]. The core micromechanics underlying the new material model is that failure of geologic materials like basalt is dominated by the interaction and growth of a distribution of small flaws, which through their collective behavior can lead to large-scale features. Given the typical scales involved in these simulations, we consider a distribution of small flaws at each material point. These flaws interact with each other and the applied stress state and grow, resulting in degradation of the elastic properties of the material. Once a critical damage level is reached, the material is assumed to become granular, and granular viscoplastic flow begins with a pressure-dependent yield strength similar to a sand. The granular flow model is an associative flow model where the yield strength is linearly dependent on the magnitude of the hydrostatic stress. Model application to Eros: Eros is thought to be a fractured shard with composition similar to L-type ordinary chondrites, which are typically composed of olivine and orthopyroxene. Since these minerals are also contained in terrestrial basalt and basalt is well studied, we assume that the material properties of basalt are reasonably representative of the material properties of Eros. We limit the impact velocities to 5 km/s, and so for simplicity we use the Mie Grüneisen equation of state for the hydrostatic response of this material. We obtained the parameters for the Mie Grüneisen equation of state from the review of shock wave data on rocks by Ahrens and Johnson [5]. We used a density of 2,874 kg/m3 with a bulk wave speed of 4,000 m/s and a slope of 1.35, together with a Grüneisen parameter of 1.7. The shear modulus is 29 GPa.  One of the major advantages of the damage model that we use is its connection to the material microstructure. This connection is explicitly specified through the assignment of a subscale flaw distribution. We assume that the flaw distribution in the material follows an inverse power-law characterized by a bounded Pareto distribution. We assume a power law slope of 3.0, which gives self-similar scaling in the crack sizes and is consistent with many of the observations of Housen and Holsapple [7].  The Pareto distribution is bounded, with  flaws of sizes from 0.0005 mm to 1.0 mm and a flaw density of 2x1012 flaws per m3. This range of flaw sizes and flaw density is consistent with the dynamic strength of Basalt measured in Kolsky bar experiments. It is reasonable to assume that traditional fracture mechanics applies to cracks on the order of a few millimeters, but it is unclear whether these ideas can be applied directly to cracks that are tens of meters in size (at some length scale, the fracture toughness becomes scale dependent). We plan to preform a few simulations using a flaw distribution that extends to a maximum flaw size of 25 meters, which is the largest flaw that could reasonably be considered sub-scale in our simulations. The granular flow model uses a linear relationship between the magnitude of the hydrostatic stress and the magnitude of the deviatoric stress. The slope of this line is just less than 0.5, which is consistent with a coarse gravel. The cohesive strength of the material is 0.1 Surface Damage Eastern Hemisphere Southern Hemisphere TailNose Figure 1: Predicted surface damage on Eros after the Himeros forming impact   MPa, which is approximately the gravitational overburden stress at the center of Eros. For the pore collapse model, we assume a quadratic compaction behavior starting at 1 MPa and 50 percent porosity to full consolidation at 1 GPa. Simulation Setup: For the purposes of our simulation, we begin with a current low-resolution shape model of Eros, the surface of which is then smoothed out to remove any existing craters, including the three largest craters Psyche, Himeros and Shoemaker. We investigate the formation of the 10 km diameter Himeros crater first, and then the formation of the Psyche crater. The Himeros impactor is assumed to be 0.8 km in diameter with an impact velocity of 5 km/s. The simulations were performed using the Generalized Interpolated Material Point Method (GIMP) [8], which has been implemented in the Uintah Computational Framework [9]. Simulations were performed using a particle size of 80 m. We use 1 particle per cell to maximize the efficiency of the numerical calculations since numerical fracture is not an important issue because geologic materials cannot sustain large elastic tensile deformations. A resolution of 80 m per cell results in 5 particles per projectile radius in the Himeros impact and only 3 for the Psyche forming impact. Although these resolutions are smaller than the ideal resolutions for resolving the impact crater itself, we are interested in the global response of the asteroid and therefore must compromise on the resolution to limit the computational complexity.  Preliminary Results: The constitutive model and the computational approach are able to simulate a variety of impact events without causing complete fragmentation of the target, and issues of residual strength and residual porosity can be examined. As shown in figure 1, the Himeros forming impact was likely sufficient to fragment a large portion of the asteroid interior and surface. In addition to computing the damage, we are able to compute the local density as shown in figure 2. By computing the volume-averaged density over the entire asteroid, we conclude that while the asteroid is heavily damaged, the bulk porosity after this one impact is close to 5 percent. This is much less than the current maximum estimated porosity for Eros of 30 percent [10], but it is reasonable that continued impact events will further increase the bulk porosity in the body to a result that is closer to observations. Initial formation of Eros from a parent body may also lead have greater porosity than 0 initial porosity assumed in our simulation. A secondary observation from these simulations is that some of the linear features that result from the Himeros forming impact may not be easily associated with the impact from their orientation. This is because the orientations of the highly damaged regions are also affected by the free surfaces derived from the shape model. Tensile failures that are a result of a spall zone below the surface tend to form a network (visible in the nose and tail views in figure 1). We note, however, that subsequent impacts (such as Psyche) will also reorient these damaged regions, and so the history of the impacts must be considered. We are in the process of running simulations that look at the impact history starting with Himeros followed by Psyche and finally Shoemaker. Summary: We present initial results from simulations of the Himeros forming impact on Eros using a new material model that includes subscale flaw evolution and pressure dependent flow of the damage material. In this work, we investigate the link between observable quantities, such as the bulk porosity, and the impact history on Eros including the effect of multiple impact events. References: [1] Oberbeck, V.R., Quaide, W.L., 1967. JGR 72, 4697-4704. [2] Asphaug, E. and Melosh, H.J., 1993. Icarus 101, 144-164. [3] Bucskowski, D.L, Barnouin-Jha, O.S. and Prockter, L.M. (2008) Icarus, 193, 39-52. [4] Tonge, A.L., Kimberley J., and Ramesh, K.T. (2013) Procedia Engineering, 58, 692701. [5] Ahrens, T.J. and Johnson, M.L. (1995) Rock Physics and Phase Relations 35-44. [6] Benz, W. and Asphaug, E. and Ryan, E.V. (1994) Icarus, 42, 10531066. [7] Housen, K.R. and Holsapple, K.A. (1999) Ica rus, 142, 21-33. [8] Wilkinson et al., (2002), Icarus, 155, 94-103. [9] S. Bardenhagen, E. Kober, (2004) CMES, 5, 477-495. [9] Parker, S., de St. Germain J.D., J. Schmidt, and many others, www.uintah.utah.edu. [10] Wilkinson et al., (2002), Icarus, 155, 94-103.  Density Southern Hemisphere Surface Nose Surface Cross Section at the impact site Cross Section at the impact site Figure 2: Predicted density on the surface and interior of Eros after Himeros forming impact  