2015.PDF
THE SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF 'BOULDERS' FORMED DURING SLOPE FAILURE IN PILES OF SELF-COHESIVE POWDERS: APPLICATION TO THE MORPHOLOGY OF REGOLITHS ON SMALL ASTEROIDS. D. D. Durda1,P. Sánchez2, A. Fischer3, G. Devaud3, D. J. Scheeres2, S. E. Roark3, P. F. Kaptchen3, and R. Dissly3,1Southwest Research Institute, 1050 Walnut Street Suite 300 Boulder CO 80302,2University of Colorado, Boulder CO 80309, 3Ball Aerospace and Technology Corporation, Boulder CO 80301.   Introduction: High-resolution images of the nearEarth asteroids 433 Eros and 25143 Itokawa, returned by the NASA NEAR-Shoemaker and JAXA Hayabusa missions, respectively, and spacecraft-reconnaissancequality radar observations of several other near-Earth asteroids (NEAs), have revealed surfaces covered in coarse regoliths.  The largest size fractions in these regoliths are boulders ranging in size up to many 10s of meters across.  While certainly some or even many of these boulders must be coherent, solid blocks of competent rock (solid rocky meteorites derived from NEAs and their main-belt precursors fall to Earth on a regular basis), the possibility remains that some others might in fact be composed of loosly-bonded clods of smaller regolith particles held together by selfcohesive forces that can play a dominant role in affecting regolith properties and processes in the microgravity environments on these small objects. Scheeres et al. [1] performed a survey of the known relevant forces that act on grains and particles on asteroid surfaces (including gravitational and rotational accelerations, Coulomb friction, self gravitation, electrostatics, solar radiation pressure forces, and surface contact cohesive forces), developed their analytical form and relevant constants for the space environment, and considered how these forces scale relative to each other.  Among key findings of that study is the result that van der Waals cohesive forces should be a significant effect for the mechanics and evolution of asteroid surfaces and interiors and that asteroid regolith may be better described by cohesive powders (for a familiar analogy, consider the mechanical properties of bread flour) than by traditional analyses assuming cohesionless grains. This observation implies that regoliths composed of impact debris of those sizes should behave on the microgravity surfaces of small asteroids like flour or other cohesive powders do in the 1-g environment here on Earth.  To this end, we have been conducting a series of laboratory experiments to investigate the role of cohesion in governing regolith processes and geomorphological expression on small solar system bodies.  Our goal is to develop an improved understanding of the geomorphological expression of granular media in the microgravity environments of regoliths on small asteroids, and to quantify the range of expected mechanical properties of such regoliths.   Experimental Approach: Many previous experimental results with cohesive powders [e.g., 2-5] have been obtained under ambient atmospheric conditions and we are reproducing some of those measurements for the sake of comparison.  We are focusing the bulk of our investigation, though, on powders that have been thermo-vac'ed to bake off adsorbed water, with experiments conducted in vacuum conditions to achieve the necessary 'cleanliness factor' and to properly recreate the environment on an airless body. The environmental chamber for our experimental work resides at Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corporation (BATC) in Boulder, CO.  This facility consists of a small, cylindrical, ultra-high-vacuum chamber that resides within a larger, industrial-grade, rough-vacuum chamber.  Pressures within each chamber are monitored and controlled independently, and when thermal control of the inner chamber is required, the outer chamber can be evacuated to provide enhanced thermal isolation.  Within the chamber our powder samples are manipulated within confined transparent walls to create columns of powders that we can then tilt or otherwise interact with to induce sloped failures, faults and fractures, and other morphological features that provide data on the self-cohesive forces at play.  A more detailed description of the chamber and its major components are presented in [6].  The powders used in our experiments include JSC-1A, 3-micron glass microbeads, and, for familiar context, ordinary unbleached white flour. Experiment Results: In addition to examining and quantifying the morphology of faults and fractures in our powder columns and piles and the angles at which slope failures occur, we have noted with interest that the talus slopes resulting from the collapse of the columns and piles often contain a number of distinct 'boulders' formed from self-cohesed 'clods' of the powder material.  Here, for illustrative purposes, we present results from one of our pile collapse experiments with flour; we will present at the meeting our results with JSC-1A and glass microbeads as well. We prepared a conical pile of flour within the chamber by sifting the powder through a sieve onto a tilt table to form a natural angle of repose.  The chamber was evauated to a pressure of ~0.6-0.7 torr; future experiments will include a high-vacuum chamber inside a large roughed out chamber with thermal control.  The table was tilted to induce slope failure within the 2015.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
pile, noting the tilt angles where signficant slope failures occurred and photo documenting the morphology of the resulting collapses.  The experiment concluded when final, catastrophic collapse of the pile ensued. Firgure 1 shows the resulting talus slope from the final collapse of the flour pile.  The prominent 'boulders' within the pile were formed entrirely from selfcohesive behavior during the collapse, since the flour was sieved to a fine consitency while forming the initial conical pile.  The superficial resemblance of the larger 'fragments' apparent within the talus slope to the coarse fraction of the regolith in regions of the surfaces of Eros and Itokawa (see Fig. 1 of [6]) suggests that some care be applied in interpreting all such large fragments on these objects as necessarilycomposed of competent hard rock.  Figure 1: Talus slope formed from the collapse of a conincal, 'angle-of-repose' pile of flour in vacuum.  Note the many 'boulders' of flour formed by selfcohesive forces during the collapse. To examine the size distribution of our flour 'boulders' for comparison with that of the boulders measured on Eros, Itokowa, and other asteroids we use the image analysis software package ImageJ to count the size and number of 'boulders' in a version of Fig. 1 in which features have been identified by eye and outlined in Photoshop (Fig. 2).  The features were independently identified by both of the first two authors and the results cross-checked and combined.  With the known image scale of 29.47 pixels/mm ImageJ counts the total number of contiguous pixel 'islands' and automatically sorts by quantities like total pixel area for each island, major and minor axes of best fit ellipses, etc. Fig. 3 shows the resulting size distribution of the 'boulders'.  In this case we count the size of each boulder as the diameter of the circle with equivalent pixel area of the 2-D projected outlines identified in Fig. 2.  The slope index of the distribution from roughly 1-10mm sizes is ~-1.5.  For comparison, the cumulative boulder size distribution on Itokawa has a slope index of -3.1 ± 0.1 [7].  Figure 2: (Top) Flour 'boulders' highlighted in Photoshop.  (Bottom) Silhouette image of boulder outlines used for image analysis in ImageJ.  Image scale is 29.47 pixels/mm.  Figure 3:  Cumulative size distribution of the 'boulders' formed in the collpase of the flour pile. References: [1] Scheeres D.J. et al. (2010) Icarus 210, 968-984. [2] Alexander A.W. et al. (2006) Powder Technol. 164, 13-21. [3] Rognon P.G. et al. (2008) J. Fluid Mech. 596, 21-47. [4] Mériaux C. and Triantafillou T. (2008) Phys. Fluids 20, 033301-1-03330113. [5] Vandewalle N. et al. (2007) Eur. Phys. J. E 22, 241-248. [6] Durda D.D. et al. (2013) LPS XLIV, abstract #2287. [7] Michikami et al. (2008) EPS 60, 1320. 2015.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
