2022.PDF
EXAMINING EFFECTS OF ORBITAL FORCING ON TITAN'S DUNE ORIENTATIONS.   G.D. McDonald1, A.G. Hayes1, R.C. Ewing2, T. Tokano3, A. Lucas4, and G. Chen5. 1Department of Astronomy, Cornell University, Ithaca NY; 2Department of Geology and Geophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station TX; 3Institut für Geophysik und Meteorologie, Universität zu Köln, Köln Germany; 4AIM Laboratory, Paris Diderot University, Paris France 5Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca NY.    Executive Summary: We explore the possibility that the orientations of Titan's equatorial dunes reflect integrative winds over orbital timescales of tens of thousands of years.  Dunes are the dominant geomorphology in Titan's equatorial terrain, covering an estimated 20% of the surface [1]. Numerous studies on the morphologic expression of these dunes and their interactions with topographic obstacles have been used to infer the wind regime responsible for their formation. Most studies have inferred west-to-east dune-forming winds [2,1,3] which cannot be consistently produced by most Global Climate Models (GCMs) and require invoking intermittent phenomena in the vicinity of autumnal and vernal equinox (e.g. [4]). These previous studies have focused primarily on examining the ability of rare westerly winds cycling over tidal or seasonal timescales to produce the currently observed dune orientations [4]. In this study, we examine the possibility that Titan's dunes are responding to cyclic variations in the wind regime over significantly longer (e.g., Milankovich) timescales. On Earth, large linear dunes similar in size to Titan's can take up to 100 thousand years to reorient their patterns in response to changes in the local wind regime [5]. On Titan, conservative estimates of the expected reorientation timescale have indicated values between 103 to 105 Titan years [6], suggesting that the dunes could be responding to bimodal winds with a longterm duty cycle on the order of Titan's proposed ~45 kyr Milankovich cycles [7]. Reoriented portions of linear dunes provide observational evidence that the dunes are being affected by changes in the wind regime (Fig. 1). Titan's Milankovich cycles are primarily a result of changes in the eccentricities and planetocentric longitude of perihelion (Lsp) of Saturn's orbit around the sun [7]. The dominant ~45 thousand year cycle results in Titan's Lsp coinciding with different seasons (Fig. 2). From a climatic perspective, the four extrema in this orbital cycle occur when Lsp  (and consequently peak solar flux) coincide with southern summer solstice (~2 kyrs ago, closest to the modern day configuration), autumnal equinox (18 kyr ago), northern summer solstice (33 kyr ago), and autumnal equinox (40 kyr ago). The possible implications of these orbital cycles   Figure 1: Reoriented dune crestlines (marked in red) in Titan's Belet dune field (170° E, 3.5° N). The image is a Cassini SAR image processed through a de-noising algorithm [8]. Reoriented crestlines are also visible in raw SAR images.   for the observed asymmetry in the distribution of Titan's polar lakes has already been established [7], making it natural to consider the effects of the cycle on Titan's other geomorphological features.  In order to examine the effects of changes in Titan's orbital configuration on dune orientations, we must first understand effects on the wind regime. This is accomplished by running a 3-dimensional GCM, incorporating topography [4] for one Titan year corresponding to the four aforementioned orbital extrema. The zonal and meridional surface wind outputs from the GCM are provided in locations corresponding to well developed portions of Titan's five largest dune fields (Fensal, Astlan, Belet, Shangri La, and Senkyo) 24 times per Titan day.  These surface wind outputs can be used to directly infer ideal dune orientations. It has been established through experiment and observational field work that dunes orient themselves so as to maximize gross bedform-normal transport—defined as the total amount of sediment transported (i.e. in either direction) perpendicular to dune crests [9]. The GCM produced annual surface wind distributions for a given dune field and orbital configuration are used to determine a gross bedform-normal transport maximizing dune orientation. This process is repeated for the wind distributions of each of the four orbital extrema, with an additional run combining the wind distributions of all four orbital extrema, in each of the five dune fields. 2022.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 2: Titan's four orbital extrema during the past 45 thousand years. Titan's relative motion to Saturn is ignored.   Figure 3: GCM predicted gross-bedform normal transport maximizing dune orientations for wind conditions corresponding to each of Titan's four orbital extrema and a combined wind regime, as well as the range of orientations observed by Cassini. Plots are for Fensal and Shangri La, two of the five studied dune fields. Orientation refers to the direction of the dune crestline, and is measured clockwise from north.  Our study compares the gross bedform-normal transport predicted dune orientations with the currently observed range of dune orientations. The observed dune orientations are determined through mappings of well-organized dunes, separated from topographic obstacles, observed in Cassini Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images. The predicted dune orientations are plotted as a function of saltation threshold, which is unknown for Titan. Lorenz et al. 2012 estimated a saltation threshold of ~1 m/s by scaling the derivation presented in Iverson et. al 1976, however the interparticle forces that dominate interactions between silicate grains (e.g., Van der Waals) may not be appropriate for hydrocarbon grains. Preliminary results demonstrate that in all five dune fields, the orbital configuration has an effect on the predicted dune orientation, with the significance of that effect varying by region (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the results indicate a close correspondence between predicted and observed dune orientations for three of the five dune fields. In Fensal, for saltation thresholds greater than ~1 m/s, ideal dune orientations for the different orbital extrema diverge significantly compared to the range of observed dune orientations (Fig. 3A). The predicted dune orientations for past orbital configurations, notably that of 40 kyr ago, are in greater agreement with the currently observed orientations than those predicted by modern wind conditions. This may be indicative of direct observation of the effects of orbital forcing on dune orientations. We are in the process of using other Titan GCMs, including TitanWRF [12] and the GCM described in Schneider et al. 2012 to verify these effects. Our preliminary results confirm that Titan's orbital configuration has an effect on predicted dune orientations and suggest that these effects may be observed today in Fensal. The potential significance of orbital forcing on modern dune orientations reinforces the necessity of considering the effects of climactic variations over long timescales in studies of geomorphology. Additionally, these results emphasize that dunes are an invaluable record of Titan's climate, and that their study can further our understanding of Titan's historical climatic conditions.  References: [1] Radebaugh  J. et al. (2008) Icarus, 194, 690-703. [2] Lorenz R.D. et. al. (2006) Science, 312, 724-727. [3] Radebaugh  J. et. al. (2010) Geomorphology, 121, 122-132. [4] Tokano T. (2010) Aeolian Research, 2, 113-127. [5] Werner B.T. and Kocurek G. (1999) Geology, 27(8), 727-730. [6] Hayes A.G. et. al. (2012) Internat. Planet. Dunes Workshop III, Abstract #7057. [7] Aharonson O. et. al. (2009) Nature Geoscience, 2, 851-854. [8] Lucas A. et. al. (2012) LPSC XLIII, Abstract #2566. [9] Rubin D.M. and Hunter R.E. (1987) Science, 237, 276-278. [10] Lorenz R.D. et. al. (2012) Internat. Planet. Dunes Workshop, Abstract #7014. [11] Iversen J.D. et. al. (1976) Icarus, 29(3), 381-393. [12] Newman C.E. et. al. (2011) Icarus, 213(2), 636-654. [13] Schneider T. et. al. (2012) Nature, 48, 58-61. 2022.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
