2029.PDF
MAHLI AFTER DARK: NIGHTTIME MARS HAND LENS IMAGER OBSERVATIONS UNDER LED ILLUMINATION.  M.E. Minitti1, K.S. Edgett2, R.A. Yingst1, P.G. Conrad3, M. Fisk4, C.J. Hardgrove5, K.E. Herkenhoff6, L.C. Kah7, M.R. Kennedy2, G.M. Krezoski2, M.T. Lemmon8, L. Lipkaman2, S.R. Kuhn9, M.L. Robinson9, V.V. Tompkins9, A. Treiman10, and K.H. Williford9; 1Planetary Science Institute (1700 E. Ft. Lowell, Suite 106, Tucson, AZ 85719, minitti@psi.edu), 2Malin Space Science Systems, San Diego, CA; 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD; 4Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR; 5Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ; 6University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN; 6USGS, Flagstaff, AZ; 7Texas A&M University, College Station, TX; 8Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA; 8Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX. Introduction:  The Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI), located on the instrument turret at the end of the robotic arm on the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Curiosity rover [1], possesses two sets of LEDs to support the imaging of geologic targets and rover hardware. MAHLI has two pairs of white light LEDs (that can be turned on separately) and two longwave UV (365 nm) LEDs. The LEDs are distributed on either side of the front lens element  (Fig. 1). The original MSL latitude range (60 °S to 60 °N) motivated the addition of the LEDs to MAHLI. The goal of the white light LEDs was to provide multiple illumination options for nearby geologic targets for both day and night imaging, facilitate mineral identification (e.g., color, cleavage, twinning), enable the search for (and imaging of) frosts, and supply illumination down deep targets (i.e., CheMin inlet, drill holes). The UV LEDs were included as an exploratory capability to search for fluorescent materials and provide another characterization tool. Night imaging activities:  MAHLI has conducted night imaging on four occasions, two focused on geologic targets and two focused on rover hardware. Broken raised ridges in Yellowknife Bay. Mineralized veins, including both raised ridges and white veins, in the John Klein area of Yellowknife Bay served as an attractive target for the first full night imaging campaign. On Sols 163-164, the rover drove over raised ridges and scuffed them in an attempt to freshly expose material within the ridges. The primary area of damage was given the target name Sayunei, and on Sol 165, the MAHLI night imaging campaign was started two hours past sunset, ensuring astronomical darkness.  For white light illumination, MAHLI acquired images of Sayunei from 26.9 cm working distance using both pairs of LEDs, and from 6.9 and 3.9 cm working distances using each pair of LEDs separately in addition to both pairs together. For UV illumination, MAHLI acquired an image with the UV LEDs for a given manual exposure time (five manual exposure times between 15-270 sec.) and then acquired a corresponding “dark frame” image with no illumination for the same manual exposure times. Dark frame images allowed background noise to be removed from the UV illumination images. MAHLI also imaged the fluorescent swatch on the MAHLI calibration target.  The night imaging campaign successfully demonstrated MAHLI’s ability to image targets at night under a variety of illumination conditions and refined knowledge of best practices for night imaging. The white material in Sayunei (suggested by ChemCam to consist of Ca-sulfate) initially appeared to produce a fluorescent response (Fig. 2). However, when the signal from the red, blue and green color channels of the MAHLI Bayer pattern CCD were separated, the result suggested that the light detected from Sayunei was merely visible light reflected from the target and not fluorescence. MAHLI also did not observe any fluorescence from the dust on the calibration target.  Drill hole imaging.  On Sol 292, MAHLI imaged the interior of the Cumberland drill hole from five different positions (directly down the drill hole, oblique views looking at the north, south, east and west quadrants of the hole) using the white light LEDs to fully document the interior color and structure of the drill hole and material collected by the drill. Limitations of arm and turret positioning around the hole led to imaging from multiple working distances (~9 and 11 cm). The illumination employed (one LED pair vs. both) was customized to ensure the best illumination into the drill hole at each position. Images across a range of focus setttings were collected to build merge products focused from the tailings pile into the base of the drill hole (Fig. 3). The drill hole campaign also included images of the drill tailings pile form 5 and 2 cm working distances using both white light and UV LEDs. The white light images served to document one of the APXS analysis spots on the drill tailings. The goal of the UV images was to document if any of the material uncovered by the drill was fluorescent. Dark frames corresponding to the UV illumination images were not collected, however, hindering the analysis of the images for a fluorescent response. No obvious signal of fluorescence (e.g., visible light signal of a color other than the purple/blue emitted by the LEDs themselves) was observed from the tailings material. “Gopher hole” imaging.  In the area of the John Klein and Cumberland drill sites, Curiosity observed 2029.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
multiple narrow cracks, informally named “gopher holes”, along the edges of outcrop slabs. To see into an otherwise-inaccessible feature and help constrain the origin of the holes, MAHLI was postitoned over one hole, target Narrows_3A, and imaged the interior and immediate surroundings of the hole from working distances of 25 and 5 cm using both sets of white LEDs. The imaging was conducted on Sol 292 during the night imaging of the Cumberland drill hole. MAHLI found that the drilling activities had filled in the gopher hole, leaving only a ~1-2 cm depression. Materials within the hole included fine sand to sandsize particles, like that of the interior of the Rocknest sand shadow [2], and rounded pebbles sourced from the steep upper rim of the hole.  “Flashlight” mode.  While MAHLI imaged the Cumberland drill hole on Sol 292, Mastcam simultaneously acquired images of MAHLI and the drill hole. The goal of this effort was to determine if combined arm, turret and camera geometries would permit the imaging of targets by the cameras on the mast while illuminated by MAHLI’s LEDs. Both geometries tested were successful. The test enables future efforts, such as the imaging of geologic targets with Mastcam while illuminated by the UV LEDs. CheMin inlet imaging. The goal of CheMin inlet imaging, which includes inspection of the mesh, funnel funnel throat, and CheMin internal surfaces exterior to the funnel, is to track any residual sample in these locations after sample dropoff. The first four CheMin inlet imaging activities were conducted during the day, using the white light LEDs to help illuminate the depths of the inlet. But diffuse sunlight hindered a clear view of the funnel and funnel throat. Thus on Sol 282, MAHLI imaged the CheMin inlet at night after delivery of the Cumberland drill sample. Context images were acquired with both white light LED pairs at a 19 cm working distance from five different positions (one centered down the inlet, four looking obliquely into the inlet). Images were also acquired from 6 cm targeting the mesh, funnel and funnel throat at a range of exposure times.  Direct illumination from the LEDs produced higher quality images of the funnel and funnel throat than the daytime images of the inlet. The images recorded a clean funnel and funnel throat, but revealed what appeared to be drill sample material adhering to the inlet mesh (Fig. 4). The material did not affect the ability of CheMin to successfully analyze the Cumberland sample. The material on the mesh appeared essentially unchanged when the inlet was imaged on Sol 411 using the optimal exposure times established on Sol 282.  References: [1] Edgett K.E. et al. (2012) SSR, 170, 259-317. [2] Minitti M.E. et al. (2013) JGR, 118, 2338–2360.  Figure 2: Sayunei target from 3.9 cm working distance under white light (left) and UV (right) illumination. Only one pair of white light LEDs illuminated the left scene.  Figure 1: Mastcam M100 image on Sol 32 of the MAHLI white light and UV LEDs  Figure 3: Focus merge product obtained from an oblique view into the Cumberland drill hole (~11 cm working distance). ChemCam LIBS spots are visible down the right side of the drill hole. Hole diameter is 1.6 cm.   Figure 4: CheMin inlet image focused on inlet mesh (1 mm spacing) from Sol 282. Arrow points to material adhering to the mesh from the Cumberland drill sample. 2029.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
