 New Insights on Origin of Dune's Orientation on Titan.  A. Lucas1, S. Rodriguez1, C. Narteau2, B. Charnay3, A. Garcia1, S. Courrech du Pont4, A.G. Hayes5, 1AIM CEA-Saclay, Paris-Diderot, Paris, France, 2IPGP, Paris France, 3LMD, UPMC, Paris, France, MSC, Paris-Diderot, Paris, France, 5Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, (dralucas@astrogeophysx.net)   Introduction:  Dunes are one of the most striking landforms observed on Titan so far, along with the polar lakes.  As the major reservoir of organics particles at the surface, dunes play an important role in the Titan's climatic cycles [1-2]. Here we address the question on the growth mode of the dunes by combining state-of-the-art image processing, GCM simulations and a recent theoretical framework on dune's modes of orientation.  Methods and Analysis:  SAR images from Cassini suffer from speckle noise, which hinder fine geomorphic analysis. In order to obtain the largest number of dune's crest orientations, we therefore used the denoised counterparts of the SAR data namely NLDSAR [3]. NLDSAR data set has been intensively used and been proved to enhance Cassini/SAR usage [3,4]. In order to analyze dune's crest orientation, we used a linear segment detection algorithm (LSD) after [5]. +70,000 segments have been extracted at global scale combining both SAR and NLDSAR data sets (i.e., performance are 2 times better with NLDSAR), making our statistical analysis well constrained.  We used the mapping polygons from [2] as well as visual inspection on order to remove any false-positive detection outside the dune fields. Because the algorithm is searching for linear segments, each time the dune changes in direction, a new segment is found (Fig. 1). Therefore, one segment provides a specific orientation locally. In this manner, we can track any variation in the dune's orientation systematically and at a global scale.  In addition, we used the  IPSL-GCM accounting for the orbital asymmetry and equinox storms [6] in order to tests different wind scenario and compare with the observed dune crest orientations: #1 we take into only the common seasonal surface winds produced by the GCM; #2 we also include the effect  equinoctial storms which produce additional strong gusts at the surface, as proposed by [6]. Additionally we also test the predictions with the splined global topography recently published [7], on top of our scenario #2(scenario #3).   Derived from the experimental evidence, a single wind regime can lead to two different dunes orientation depending on the sediment availability. Sediment supply will therefore select the mechanism of dune's growth: either increasing in height from the destabilization of a sand bed (i.e., namely "bedform instability mode") or elongating on a non-erodible ground from a localized sand source (i.e., namely "fingering mode") [8].  From the wind roses obtained from our climatic simulations, we thence calculated the direction of the averaged sand flux, i.e. the resultant drift direction (RDD), for the two modes and compared with the observed dune's crest orientations. Fig. 1 - Segment Detection over a SAR image at the location (250ºW, 12ºS). The coverage is about 300km in width.  Image is stretched in order to highlight the segment shown in yellow.  Results and discussion: We found that the deviation from the W-E direction in scenario #1 is not able to reproduce the observations. Expected directions of propagation is too pole wards (up to 60º off) compared to the observed directions in both modes. When equinox storms are included (scenario #2), we observed a good match with observations only for the fingering mode. However, as the bedform instability mode is almost orthogonal to the first mode, it could be therefore responsible of the secondary dunes orientation observed in some areas (Fig. 2). (Note that an other interpretation has been proposed as origin of these secondary bedforms [9]). Runs with the topography show that large-scale reliefs are responsible of long-baseline deviation of the dune crest orientations.  Therefore, our results suggest that dune's orientation is mainly controlled by the actual wind regime (with necessary energetic storms at the equinoxes), meaning that dunes are probably still active today, and that they are preferentially growing eastward following the "fingering" mode. Secondary bedforms instabilities may also develop in the orthogonal direction to the dominant wind direction.   Fig. 2 - Secondary bedforms as seen on the denoised version of T8 RADAR swath.  Flux rose and the two growth modes (fingering in black, bed instability in red) deduced at the same latitudes (238ºW, 9ºS) by the surface winds generated by the IPSL-GCM [6]. The coverage in width is about 80 km.  References: [1] Lorenz et al, Science, 2006. [2] Rodriguez et al. Icarus, 2013. [3] Lucas et al., LPSC, 2012. [4] Aharonson et al., AGU, 2012. [5] Grompone von Gioi, IPOL, 2012. [6] Charnay et al., AGU Fall Meeting, 2013. [7] Lorenz et al., Icarus, 2013. [8] Courrech du Pont et al., Nat. Geosc., under review. [9] McDonald et al., LPSC, this issue.  