 MODELLING OF THE THERMO-CHEMICAL EVOLUTION OF CERES. W. Neumann(1), D. Breuer(1) and T. Spohn(1,2), (1) German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Planetary Research, Rutherfordstraße 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany (wladimir.neumann@dlr.de), (2) Westfälische Wilhelm-Universität Münster (WWU), Institute for Planetology, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str. 10, 48149 Münster, Germany. Introduction: The asteroid Ceres is the largest body in the asteroid belt. It can be seen as one of the remaining examples of the intermediate stages of planetary accretion, which additionally is substantially different from most asteroids. Studies of such protoplanetary objects like Ceres and Vesta provide insight into the history of the formation of Earth and other rocky planets. One of Ceres' remarkable properties is the relatively low average bulk density of 2077±36 kg m-3 (see [1]). Assuming a nearly chondritic composition, this low value can be explained either by a relatively high average porosity[2], or by the presence of a low density phase [3,4]. Based on numerical modelling[3,4], it has been proposed that this low density phase, which may have been represented initially by water ice or by hydrated silicates, differentiated from the silicates forming an icy mantle overlying a rocky core. However, the shape and the moment of inertia of Ceres seem to be consistent with both a porous and a differentiated structure. In the first case Ceres would be just a large version of a common asteroid. In the second case, however, this body could exhibit properties characteristic for a planet rather than an asteroid: presence of a core, mantle and crust, as well as a liquid ocean in the past and maybe still a thin basal ocean today. This issue is still under debate, but will be resolved (at least partially), once Dawn orbits Ceres. We study the thermal evolution of a Ceres-like body via numerical modeling in order to draw conclusions about the thermal metamorphism of the interior and its present-day state. In particular, we investigate the evolution of the interior assuming an initially porous structure. Our model is suited to prioritise between the two possible structures mentioned above and to constrain the present-day state of Ceres' interior. Model: We adopted the numerical model from [5], which computes the thermal and structural evolution of planetesimals, including compaction of the initially porous primordial material. Our calculations start with a homogeneous cold body which has a uniform average porosity of 50 %. Following [2], we assume a CI carbonaceous chondritic composition with the associated amount of short- and long-lived radioactive elements. This porous body is larger than Ceres because of the high initial porosity value upon accretion. Upon heating, the compaction of the initially porous material is modeled via a creep law (see Eqn. (1)). Assuming a certain instance of formation t0 relative to the formation of the calciumaluminium-rich inclusions (CAIs), the main goal is to check, whether at the end of a simulation (corresponding to the present day) the body would match the radius of Ceres and whether it would have an average porosity of 10 %, which matches the average density of 2100 kg m-3. The heat conduction equation is solved in radial symmetry, where parameters depend on the composition. Furthermore, the bulk thermal conductivity and the heat source density are functions of porosity, and the specific heat capacity changes with the temperature. Assuming an initial porosity of 50 % and the intrinsic geometry which is described by the simple cubic packing of spherical grains, the model computes porosity loss as a temperature and pressure dependent process: 31 log(1 ) e , (1)n E RTBb t      with porosity ϕ, time t, a constant B ≈ 4.0×10-5, initial grain size b, effective stress σ1, constant n ≈ 3/2, activation energy E, gas constant R and temperature T. The creep activation energy E is adjusted upon the compaction of the single minerals in a CI carbonaceous chondritic composition according to their volume fractions. Results: Figure 1 shows the average porosity as function of the formation time t0 in a Ceres-like body. Formation times of up to 60 Ma relative to the CAIs have been considered. Even for t0 = 60 Ma, the average porosity falls far below 10 %. Locally, it is reduced to zero except in an outer shell with the thickness of up to 60 km. In this shell the porosity varies between zero in the compacted region and 50 % at the surface. For t0 > 8 Ma, the loss of porosity is mainly due to the heating by the long-lived nuclides. These results are somewhat predetermined by the choice of the initial porosity: smaller initial value of 40 % leads to smaller final average porosities. The main factor which determines the degree of compaction of Ceres is the amount of the heating experienced during the evolution. The interior temperatures and the peak temperature vary with the formation time. In all simulations the water ice melting temperature was exceeded. This means that if the water had been present in the free state, liquid water must have formed, making hydration of the silicate minerals  Fig. 1. Present average porosity predicted for different formation times of Ceres assuming heating by short- or / and long-lived nuclides. Here, instantaneous accretion is used as an approximation of the continuous runaway accretion. However, the accreting material in the form of smaller planetesimals could be already pre-heated and pre-compacted. This could have increased the effectiveness of compaction of the early Ceres. Thus, the final average porosities obtained from our calculations serve possibly as an overestimate of the actual one. possible. For t0 < 10 Ma, peak central temperature of 500 K was exceeded, allowing for the melting of hydrated silicates and also dehydration, followed possibly by the water-rock differentiation. For even earlier formation, the solidus temperature of the iron phase of 1213 K (for t0 ≤ 3 Ma) and even that of the silicate phase of 1425 K (t0 ≤ 2 Ma) were exceeded. Production of iron and silicate melts could result in the differentiation of an iron core and silicate mantle below the water ocean. Since in the late-forming cases no iron or silicate melt is produced, in those simulations where a substantial part of Ceres is porous, no differentiation can be expected at all. On the other hand, formation within the first few million years after the CAIs would most probably result in a layered structure with varying degree of differentiation, but the compaction would be almost complete. Conclusions: Our results imply that even for a high initial porosity of 50 % and late formation times of up to 60 Ma after the CAIs, Ceres ultimately compacts due to hot pressing down to an average porosity of approximately 6 %. This argues against the suggestion that the low density of Ceres can be explained by a porous structure[2]. A preliminary study by [6] confirms this result. However, a more systematic study which would consider the variation of the bulk density within the error bar of ±36 kg and additionally continuous accretion is needed (similar to the one performed in [7]) to exclude this case completely. The final confirmation will probably be provided by Dawn. If so, a low-density phase (water ice or hydrated silicates) should be introduced. The interior temperatures calculated in our simulations allow production of liquid water around the centre of Ceres for any formation time and even production of iron and silicate melts for an early formation. However, this is not sufficient to conclude a differentiated structure. Self-consistent numerical modelling of the differentiation processes (water-rock and metal-silicate) is needed in order to constrain the sizes of the single layers. Thereby, relevant processes like amorphous to crystalline ice transition, melting of ice, hydrothermal convection, hydration and dehydration of silicates, differentiation of ice and silicates, silicate and iron melting, which would most certainly influence the differentiation, must be considered. Taken together, Ceres seems to be an ice-rich body which which may have an at least partially differentiated structure with a rocky core and an ice mantle. Thus, it should be placed among the bodies where planetary processes operated significantly, altering primive interior and possibly surface composion and characteristics, by contrast to most Main belt members, which appear to consist of (relatively) primitive material. Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) Priority Programme 1385 "The First 10 Million Years of the Solar System - a Planetary Materials Approach" and by the Helmholtz Association through the research alliance "Planetary Evolution and Life". [1] Thomas, C. Et al. (2005) Nature, 437, 224-226. [2] Zolotov, M. Yu. (2009) Icarus, 204, 183-193. [3] McCord, T. B and Sotin, C. (2005) JGR, 110, E05009. [4] Castillo-Rogez, J. C. and McCord, T. B. (2010) Icarus, 205, 443-459. [5] Neumann, W. et al. (2012) A&A, 543, A141. [6] Castillo-Rogez, J. C. (2011) Icarus, 215, 599-602. [7] Neumann, W. et al. (2013) Icarus, 224, 126-143. 