2056.PDF
GEOLOGIC MAPPING OF CENTRAL VALLES MARINERIS, MARS.  C. M. Fortezzo1, K. L. Tanaka1, T. Platz2, J. A. P. Rodriguez2,3, P. S. Kumar4, 1U.S. Geologic Survey, Astrogeology Science Center, 2255 N. Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, Arizona 86001 (cfortezzo@usgs.gov); 2Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ; 3NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA; 4National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad, India.  Introduction: Valles Marineris (VM) constitutes the largest canyon system in the Solar System and has a correspondingly complex history. It consists of interconnected and enclosed troughs that extend from the Tharsis volcanic complex to the southern circumChryse outflow channels [1]. The central portion of VM (CVM, Fig. 1) includes the deepest of these troughs. Within these troughs, which can be as deep as ~9 km, occur the thickest exposed sections of (a) layered wall rocks on the planet, thought to be mostly lavas and other early crustal rocks [2-3], and (b) light-toned interior layered deposits (ILD), generally thought to be sedimentary or volcanic rocks [4].  The trough floors are extensively covered by landslides, alluvial/delta fans and eolian deposits. In addition, they appear locally dissected by channel networks and include patches of chaotic terrain development. The plateau surfaces that surround these troughs are extensively cratered and modified by contractional (wrinkle) ridges and extensional faults and grabens, some of which are aligned with pit chains. The plateau surfaces are also covered by various types of flow deposits including some of possible volcanic and sedimentary origin. Other surface deposits include patches of light-toned layered deposits (LTLD) and eolian mantles.  Despite numerous studies over the four decades since VM’s discovery by the Mariner 9 spacecraft [e.g., 1, 4-6], VM stratigraphy and spatial and temporal evolution remain largely based on lower resolution Viking Orbiter image data and interpolated MOLA topography. Newer image, topographic, and spectral data justify revisiting previous work including (1) mapping of stratigraphic, tectonic, volcanic, mass-wasting, and other geologic landforms and features that document trough development; (2) documentation and interpretation of ILD stratigraphic and compositional variability and timing of formation; and (3) potential far-field influences (e.g., climate, regional geophysics) on CVM development. Given the higher resolution (0.25-100 m/pixel) of the newer data, we limit our study to the CVM region (Fig. 1), where the largest troughs and majority of the ILD occur. This focus still includes most of the typical features of VM. In this study, we apply stratigraphic and structural mapping and analysis, crater statistics, and hyperspectral analyses. In this, our first year of a four year study, we detail the eastern half of the map area.  Figure 1: THEMIS daytime infrared mosaic (100 m/pix) of the mapping region (0° to 15°S,  -80° to -65°E) with nomenclature displayed for the larger features in the area.   Methodology: Using geographic information system (GIS) software, we are characterizing and mapping the distribution of materials and features exposed within the canyons and on the plateaus surrounding CVM at 1:1,000,000-scale, with drafting at 1:250,000-scale using a linear vertex spacing of 500 m. We are examining the timing relationships among unit outcrops and features through mapping relations (i.e., unit contacts, marker beds, unconformities) and crater densities. For the latter, we are using CraterTools [7], a GIS add-on, to count craters on discrete geologic materials,  and CraterStats [8] to plot and determine ages [e.g., 9]. For stratigraphic analysis, we are using the GIS add-on LayerTools [10] to measure orientations of layered materials to help interpret depositional environment and document changes in stratigraphy. Tectonic analyses include (1) characterization of various deformational features (wrinkle ridges, fractures, faults (dip-slip and strikeslip), grabens and folds), (2) their spatial distribution, and relative age relationships, (3) kinematic and dynamic analyses to understand the nature of crustal motion and the stress regimes that were involved in the generation of the deformational features, and (4)  2056.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
modeling of oblique extension (a right-lateral strikeslip motion followed by rifting).  Datasets: The Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) Context Camera (CTX) mosaic provides ~95% coverage over the map area, with 99% coverage within the troughs, at 6 m/pix. This mosaic provides fine details of unit relationships and bulk layering. The CTX mosaic will allow tracing of layered packages throughout the wall rock and within the ILD. The Mars Express High-Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) provides both visible-range at 12.5 - 25 m/pix and topography at 50 m/pix. The topography is unprecedented for CVM and provides topographically derived products (e.g., hillshade and slope), and allows detailed 3D visualization. Mars Odyssey THEMIS daytime and nighttime infrared mosaics provide details at 100 m/pix and will aid in determining material variation based on thermal differences. OMEGA and CRISM hyperspectral data will be used to look at the composition of discrete units and examine variance within outcrops at select locations. In addition, we also utilize Mars Global Surveyor MOLA for topographic context outside the map area (460 m/pix), and MRO HiRISE images (≥25 cm/pix), where supportive. Initial CVM mapping results: We have thus far identified eight categories of material units, based on their typical geographical settings, geomorphic expressions, and geologic origins. Most categories are made up of multiple map units, subdivided by additional morphology criteria, and by relative age. In addition, we are documenting further temporal relationships within units, including terraces within wall rocks and individual landslide lobes within overlapping sequences. Temporal inferences can be made based on (a) cross-cutting relationships among outcrops of the same unit separated by internal contacts and structures and on (b) dating of temporally related features such as landslide alcove development.  The unit groups consist of: (1) Surficial materials including low-albedo mantles, sand sheets, and transverse eolian ridge fields; (2) crater and ejecta materials; (3) landslide and talus typically proximal to canyon walls with lineated and smooth talus; slumped, pitted, and flow-dominated landslides; and backslide materials; (4) catena floor materials, including a younger etched unit and an older, precollapse unit; (5) chasma floor materials consisting of ridged, smooth, rugged, and terrace-forming materials; (6) interior layered deposits within VM troughs that include cap rock, laminated, and massive or poorly lineated units; (7) exterior layered deposits (identified in CVM at Sinai Planum [11]); and (8) plateau materials made up of the Ophir Planum friable unit; Sinai and Thaumasia Plana flow units; and smooth, rugged and older exposed wall rock. In addition, we are mapping linear features where useful in reconstructing the geologic history. These features include unit contacts with certain, approximate, buried, and internal younger/older relationship types. Marker beds show where prominent layers and sequences are traceable for long distances; some may be indicative of a shift in depositional environment. Unconformities indicate cessations in deposition or erosional events that provide insight into the history  of canyon rock accumulation. Tectonic features include inferred grabens, normal faults, contractional wrinkle ridges, and strike-slip faults. Some ridges are differentiated as sinuous (possible inverted fluvial features), curvilinear on landslides, and erosional geomorphologies (yardangs and massifs). Scarps are mapped at collapse margins, landslide heads and toes, and flow margins.  Channels and rilles are also differentiated to show the influence of volcanic and fluvial processes in the development of CVM. Flow directions of lava flows and debris flows indicate the direction of flow and the source region. Finally, we map crater rim crests and buried crater features larger than 5 km. Future work: In this first year, we are investigating the eastern half of the CVM study area. This includes mapping all geologic materials and linear features, measuring layered deposit thicknesses and bedding and structure attitudes, and producing crater statistics. The goals are to present progress reports at LPSC in March, 2014 and the Planetary Geologic Mappers Meeting in June, 2014. The eastern CVM results will be reported in a peer-reviewed article. During the remainder of the project, we will study the western map area, test the existing tectonic scenarios of CVM development, and examine the stratigraphic relationships of the IDL. We will finalize and submit the map to the USGS for review, and publish several peer-reviewed journal articles.  References: [1] Lucchitta B.K. et al. (1992) in Kieffer H.H. et al. (eds.) Mars, U. Arizona Press, p. 453-492. [2] McEwen A.S. et al., (1999) Nature, 397. [3] Murchie S.L. et al. (2010) J. Geophys. Res., 114. [4] Lucchitta B.K. et al. (1994) J. Geophys. Res., 99. [5] Witbeck N.E. et al. (1991) USGS Map I-2010. [6] Dohm J.M. et al. (2009) J. Volcan. Geotherm. Res., 185. [7] Kneissl T. et al. (2010), Planet. Space Sci., 59 (11-12). [8] Michael G.G. and Neukum G. (2010) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 294. [9] Platz T., et al. (2013), Icarus, 225. [10] Kneissl T. et al. (2010) LPSC XV1, Abs. #1640. [11] Tanaka, K.L. et al. (2011) Euro. Planet. Sci. Conf., Abs. #EPSCDPS2011-269. 2056.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
