2064.PDF
SOUNDING THE INTERIOR OF MARS AND VENUS USING EXISTING SPACECRAFT AND FUTURE LANDERS. C. T. Russell1, M. Villarreal1, R. Hart1, Y. J. Ma1, J. G. Luhmann2, B. Jakosky3, S. Smrekar4, W. B. Banerdt4, B. P. Weiss5, C. A. Raymond4, B. J. Anderson6, 1University of California Los Angeles, Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, 603 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA, 2University of California Berkeley, Space Sciences Laboratory, 7 Gauss Way#7450, Berkeley, CA 94720-7450, USA.,3University of Colorado, Laboratory for Atmospheric and Spae Physics, Department for Geological Sciences, Boulder, CO 80303-7814, USA, 4Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA-91109, USA, 5Massachussetts Institute of Technology, Dept. of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, 77 Massachussetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA, 6Johns Jopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 11100 Johns Hopkins Road, Laurel, MD 20723-6099, USA.   Introduction:  Because Mars and Venus have no significant global planetary magnetic field, terrestrial methods of sounding the crust and mantle cannot be employed.  Nevertheless the solar wind interactions with Mars and Venus develop a magnetic sheath or layer draped over the sunlit side of the planetary ionosphere and stretching in the anti-sunward direction.  This magnetic layer is both strong and only slowly changing with time.  This layer provides the means of electromagnetically sounding the size of the metallic cores of Mars and Venus using existing missions, more accurately if supplemented with observations on the surface or in the case of Venus in the atmosphere.  This sounding technique is similar in concept to the electromagnetic sounding of the Moon using Apollo subsatellite measurements of the induced dipole magnetic moment of the Moon when the Moon entered the lobes of the Earth’s magnetic tail, a low plasma energy density (i.e. low plasma beta) region.  The core excluded the external field as sketched in Figure 1.  The resulting induced dipole moment surrounding the Moon was that expected to result from a conducting core of radius 400 km [1].  This is the radius that is now accepted for the core from modern examination of the Apollo seismic data [2].   Fig.1. The distortion of a uniform magnetic field by an infinitely conducting sphere   Our longest and most complete study of the solar wind interaction with a “magnetized’ planetary atmosphere has been carried out using the Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Venus Express measurements in 24hour elliptical polar orbits about Venus.  These spacecraft have complementary lines of apsides, PVO with its line of apsides near the ecliptic plane and VEX with its line of apsides close to the ecliptic pole.  By mapping the magnetic field at low altitudes on the day and night sides of Venus with PVO and over the north pole with VEX and verifying the expected configuration of the ionospheric magnetic field with magnetohydrodynamic numerical models we obtained the geometric model for the draped magnetic field shown in Figure 2.  On the dayside the field in the lower ionosphere is horizontal and very little magnetic field diffuses through the bottom of the ionosphere.  Over the terminator regions the magnetic layer weakens and the higher altitude magnetic field expands upward the field at the middle of the layer remains horizontal, and the lower altitude field dips into the atmosphere [3].  Thus the magnetic configuration of the night time field is affected by the core and its precise orientation and strength can be used with modelling to determine the core size.  Magnetic measurements with magnetometers in the Venus atmosphere would improve the accuracy of this measurement.  Fig.2. The magnetic configuration of the magnetic  layer at low altitudes in the Venus ionosphere.[3]    This same approach can be used at Mars using the magnetic measurements with the MAVEN mission at low altitude in the Martian ionosphere.  MAVEN arrives at Mars in September 2014.  InSight is scheduled to be launched in 2016 and will carry the 2064.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
first magnetometer to the Martian surface.  The diurnal magnetic field variation associated with the rotation of Mars beneath the ionospheric magnetic field will improve the accuracy of the nightside magnetic map needed to probe the core size.  The addition of magnetic measurements on the surface of Mars in 2020 would open up the ability of sounding the interior even more accurately with a two point measurement and to utilize a broader spectral range in sounding the interior.  Venus Express, MAVEN, InSight and in theory Mars 2020 can also measure the time varying magnetic fields at frequencies of up to several Hz.  The VEX data show that there are signals in the Venus ionosphere that could be used for sounding if they penetrated the bottom of the ionosphere.  MAVEN will be able to confirm this for Mars and InSight later can look for these waves on the surface of Mars.  We look forward to obtaining these data and extending our knowledge of the interiors of Venus and Mars. References:  [1] Russell, C.T., P.J. Coleman, Jr., and B.E. Goldstein. Measurements of the lunar induced magnetic moment in the geomagnetic tail: Evidence for a lunar core? in Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. 1981. [2] Weber, R.C., P.Y. Lin, E. J. Garnero, Q. Williams, P. Lognonne, Siesmic detection of the lunar core, Science, 331, 309-312, doiL10:1126/science.1199375, 2011. [3] M.N. Villareal, C.T. Russell, J.G. Luhmann, R.J. Strangeway, T.L. Zhang, Low altitude large-scale magnetic fields in the Venus ionosphere: Complementary observations from the Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Venus Express, presented at Fall AGU Meeting, San Francisco, California, December 2013.  2064.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
