2074.PDF
 THE SHAPES OF THE LINNE SIMPLE IMPACT CRATERS ON THE MOON - NOT PARABOLIC. J. E. Chappelow,  Meteorifics Inc., 1148 Sundance Loop, Fairbanks, AK, USA (john.chappelow@saga-inc.com)     Introduction:  Simple impact craters have long been idealized as 'bowl-shaped' or, more quantitatively, as  nearly  parabolic  [1,2].  However,  in  2002,  Chap­pelow and Sharpton [3] showed that the shadows cast in truly parabolic impact craters must be bounded by semi-circular shadowfronts in the down-sun direction, while  ones  with  more  conical  shapes  have  shadows bounded  by elongated  ellipses.  Simple  inspection  of crater shadows in planetary imagery makes clear that the shapes of the vast  majority of simple craters  fall between these two cases, vary significantly, and differ considerably from the parabolic ideal. Linne crater on the Moon has long been cited as a paradigm for simple impact craters  [1,2]  and thus, by inference,  is  nearly parabolic.  However,  Robinson  et  al.  [5]  and  Chap­pelow [6] have both shown that Linne is actually closer to cone-shaped than parabolic. All of this opens to real question the model of simple craters as parabolic, and of  Linne  as  their  paradigm.  Herein  I  present  a  pilot study of several lunar simple craters in furtherance of two goals: 1. demonstrate the utility of the Free Shad­owfront Method for determining the shapes of simple impact  craters,  and  2.  show that,  like  Linne,  several nearby classic  examples  of  simple  craters  are  not  in fact nearly parabolic but varying degrees of hyperbolic.     Methods:  The Free Shadowfront Method (FSM), and its computer implementation CRATERZ, were de­tailed  in  [5]  and  [6],  though the current  version has been improved by the addition of least-squares fitting of the rim and free shadowfront. Here it is applied to the classic lunar simple craters Linne A, B, F, G, and H. These craters are all large enough that each has been traversed by at  least one LRO_LOLA transect  which nearly bisects it (Fig.1, right), allowing for comparison of the FSM results with LOLA-measured profiles.     Study area: Three LRO Wide Angle Camera im­ages (m162222576, m165753926, m165760700) of the target  craters  were  acquired  via  the  internet.  The craters all lie along a line running roughly N-S, north and east of Linne Crater itself, in western Mare Sereni­tatis  (Fig.1,  left).  The  area  is  divided  by the surface contact between older, early Imbrian volcanic plains to the south and darker, younger, late Imbrian flows to the north, which is visible between Linne F and B.      Results: Excellent fits to the crater rims and shad­owfronts were produced by the new least-squares pro­cedures  (Fig.1,  right),   giving  excellent  agreement between the FSM and LOLA profiles (Fig.1,  center) except  where  the  LOLA transect  did  not  pass  close enough to the crater center (Linne B). The CRATERZ results were achieved with only a few minutes of effort each (much less than the time simply to locate, acquire, and prepare the imagery).     All of the craters are quite symmetric - only Linne G displays even minor asymmetry. Linne, and Linne F and B each contain flat bottoms composed of bottom fill to approximate depths of 25m [5], 150m and 275m (Fig.1), respectively. Without this bottom fill, each of these  craters  would  be  quite  deep  (d/D>0.24).  With their flat floors they are more in line with the oft-cited paradigm of d/D~0.20 (Fig.2). It  is also interesting to note that the three craters with flat bottoms also have the  lowest  eccentricities.  Are  these  depth  and  shape numbers,  and  the  presence  of  flat  bottoms  in  these craters,  related?  Certainly  the  extra  depths  of  these craters would suggest that  they may have been more prone to the processes which would produce such bot­tom fill. It is further interesting to note that Linne, with its bright halo of pristine ejecta,  is almost surely the youngest  of  all  six craters  -  and is also the deepest, least eccentric, and has proportionally the least bottom fill. Are these facts significant? Only crater-shape sur­veys of larger numbers of such craters can answer these questions.     Finally, all six craters have eccentricity values con­siderably greater  than unity,  indicating that,  analytic­ally, their shapes depart significantly from the parabol­ic. While a sample of only six craters cannot possibly establish a new paradigmal simple crater shape, it does strongly suggest that a new one may be needed.   Fig. 2: Comparison of the shapes of the Linne craters to the current model. All are considerably more eccent­ric than the parabolic paradigm (bottom).    Conclusions: These results show both the accuracy and  efficiency  of  the  FSM,  as  implemented  in  the 2074.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
CRATERZ program, as well as the shortcomings of the existing model of simple craters. Given this, and other interesting questions also raised herein, I am currently preparing  a  wider  survey  of  kilometer-scale  simple craters on Mare Serenitatis.Fig. 1, Left: Context image of  Linne craters (north (top) to south (bottom)) G,H,F,B,A; results for Linne itself can be found in ref. [5]. The craters lie along a line running roughly N-S, north and east of Linne crater in western Mare Serenitatis. Center: A comparison of CRATERZ shadow measurement results and LOLA laser altimeter measurements of these craters. The systematic difference seen in Linne B is almost certainly due to the slight offset of the LOLA track from the center of the crater. Right: The rim and shadowfront fits for each crater, and it's LOLA ground track. To show the shadow effect of its flat bottom, a gap is left in the LOLA track for Linne B. All dimensions are in meters and the scales are 1:1.References: [1] dePater & Lissauer (2001)  Planetary Sciences.  New York: Cambridge University Press. [2] Melosh  (2011)  Planetary  Surface  Processes.  New York: Cambridge University Press. [3] Chappelow, JE, Sharpton, VL (2002),  MAPS,  37,  479.  [4] Robinson, M.,  et  al.  (2011)  42nd LPSC,  abst.#2063.  [5]  Chap­pelow, JE (2013) MAPS, 48, 1863. [6] Chappelow, JE (2013) 44th LPSC, abst.#1455.2074.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
