2091.PDF
DYNAMICAL FATE OF CLUMPS FORMED IN SATELLITE MERGERS.  D. Cotto-Figueroa, E. I. Asphaug and A. Reufer, School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. (dcottofi@asu.edu, easphaug@asu.edu, areufer@asu.edu)   Introduction: The middle-sized moons (MSMs) of Saturn are icy bodies approximately 300-1500 km diameter, whose cumulative mass is approximately 5% the mass of Titan.  Although it is generally thought that they accreted from a gas and particle disk around Saturn [1, 2 and references therein], this classical scenario seems unable to explain their diverse geology and composition, ranging from pure ice to mostly rock. Recently the idea that the MSMs (and perhaps Titan) formed in a series of collisions has flourished [3-6]. Sekine and Genda [3] proposed that the MSMs are remants of a hit and run collision into a disappeared Titan-like satellite of Saturn. Asphaug and Reufer [4] proposed instead that they are unaccreted remnants from the few collisional mergers that formed Titan (Figure 1). In each scenario, the main uncertainty and skepticism, which motivates the research presented here, is whether unaccreted or hit and run remnants can attain stable orbits and avoid becoming accreted.  Concerning [4], the typical acrretion time of clumps formed in a collisional merger forming Titan at its current location would be approximately only 500 years (~10,000 orbits of Titan), and even less if the satellite-forming merger occurred closer to Saturn. So we consider ~1 million orbits as a threshold for stability, and while this is somewhat arbitrary it is longer than the timescale of tidal migration and thus represents the limit of a predictive study.  We study the dynamical fate of clumps formed in satellite mergers by coupling N-body simulations with the results of collisional mergers in SPH simulations.  The results obtained here would give us some insight concerning the actual likelihood that the MSMs found today might be leftovers from collisional mergers. Clump Formation and Evolution:  A range of simulations of collisional mergers of two large satellites have been conducted [4] using the smooth particle hydrodynamics code Splatch [7].  The outcome is a final merger MF representative of Titan, along with a distribution of bound and unbound clumps (M1, M2, M3…) that are found, in these simulations (Fig. 1) to have sizes and compositions like Saturn's MSMs.   Bound clumps will soon accrete onto MF, but escaping clumps represent potential candidates for MSMs.  Some, perhaps most, of these unbound clumps would end up being accreted later, as their orbits cross each other that of MF. Is this process of satellite formation meaningful [4], or are these escaping clumps just transient objects?     Analytically it is easy to show that the characteristic timescale for the sweep-up of all clumps is short, a few thousand orbits. But scattering and tidal migration and mutual collisions can make a substantial difference. Here we use dynamical models linked to SPH outcomes to identify the characteristic fraction of clumps that would survive typical satellite mergers, and the characteristic type of collisions that would result in a large fraction of surviving clumps.    Figure 1. Five snapshots (a-e, clockwise) of a 1:3 mass ratio collision between two satellites at their mutual escape velocity vimp=vesc= 2.6 km/s forming a body approximately the mass and bulk density of Titan. Gravitationally instabilities in the spiral arms form clumps; those escaping (left of the red line in e) are potential MSMs.  Reproduced from [4]; see https://vimeo.com/50778094.       Method. We start by defining stable orbital configurations of one or more satellites in a planetary system (such as Saturn) in which a collision (merger or other giant impact) is assumed to have occurred.  The resulting merged satellite (Titan in the scenario of [4]) is replaced by the largest merged body MF and its distribution of unbound clumps, as determined from the SPH simulations. So this new configuration, largely the same but with the addition of MSMs, is numerically integrated for at least one million orbits of MF using the N-body integrator Mercury [8].        The collision approach vector in the SPH simulations is a free parameter, presenting a large parameter space for each simulation that we have begun to explore. For now we consider a generic collision, in which the initial mass of the satellite Mf is set to 80% of Titan's current mass and the total mass of the 2091.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
clumps is equal to the remaining 20%.  Characterized from the simulations of [4], the clumps are assigned masses and escaping velocities ranging from ~0.5 to 1.5 km/s from Mf and distributed in the plane of the collision, and the system is evolved dynamically.  In future work we will evolve outcomes of hundreds of SPH collision simulations (mergers, hit and runs, disruptions) that might occur, rotating each collision in space to represent all the possible impact parameters; for now we are exploring the sensitivity of the system and the prospects for clump survival.      Preliminary Work:  We start with a coplanar uniform distribution of clumps in Titan's plane, that are assigned escaping velocities ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 km/s. The distribution of clumps is rotated every five degrees along the X and Y axes from -85 to 90 degrees and the population is integrated numerically for one million orbits using Mercury [8].      In the first case, we assume that all collisions are inelastic (perfect accretion). We computed the average fraction of clumps that survive versus the angle at which the distibution was rotated. On average, only 1.9% of the clumps survive - sufficient to explain a few stragglers, but not the Saturn system of MSMs.      A different story emerges when we consider what actually happens in these clump-clump collisions. Figure 2 plots the ratios of the impact velocity to the mutual escape velocity between clumps. While clumps colliding directly with Mf are likely to accrete (and always do in our simulations), clump-clump collisions will not be perfect mergers, because the velocities are always at least five times the mutual escape velocity.       Instead, we have found that all the collisions should be catastrophically disruptive, leaving then a ring of material that would thereafter interact with the remaining clumps before it disipates. The interaction between each ring and the remaining clumps could perhaps drive them to more circular orbits that would avoid accretion, something we are modeling and will report.      For now we carried out the same dynamical integrations of satellites and clumps, but without allowing clump-clump collisions. This would be analogous to the end member of hit and run collision (colliding bodies 'bouncing off'), but in reality the actual collisions will have to be modeled using SPH, a large effort in a relatively unexplored collision regime.      In this non-accretion scenario, where the only 'out' is for a clump to be accreted by Mf or by Saturn, or to escape the system, the average clump survival rate increases to 12.9%, sufficient to explain the mass fraction of surviving clumps represented by the MSMs of Saturn.  While not a validation of the scenario proposed by [4], it at least indicates that there are significant dynamical pathways for clump survival to be explored. Of course, the true survival fraction should be that one obtained from a combination of non-accretion (hit and run collisions), perfect accretion, and complete disruption scenarios, in a system that mimics the dynamics of the accreting terrestrial planetary system, where the significance of imperfect accretion is also beginning to be appreciated.    Figure 2. The ratio of the impact velocity and the mutual escape velocity vimp/vesc of all the collisions between clumps in the simulations vs the number of orbits at which they occur.  All ratios are higher than 5, which will result in catatrosphic disruptions.   Expectations:  We aim to do N-body simulations of various distributions of clumps resulting from the collisional mergers in the SPH simulations that are representative of realistic scenarios.  We will present an statistical analysis of the N-body simulations carried out.  We aim to identify the characteristic fraction of clumps from collisional mergers that would avoid accretion and attain long-term stable orbital evolutions along with the common characteristics that they share and the types of collisions and scenarios more propense to a higher survival rate.    References:  [1]  Charnoz, S. et al. (2011) Icarus 216, 535-550. [2] Canup, R. M.  and Ward, W. R. (2006) Nature 441, 834-839. [3] Sekine, Y. and Genda, H. (2012) Planet. Space Sci. 63, 133-138. [4] Asphaug, E. and Reufer, A. (2013) Icarus 223, 544-565 [5] Hamilton, D. P. (2013) AAS/DPS  Meetings Abstracts 45, 302.01 [6] Cuk, M. (2013) The Moons of Saturn:Young or Old? ASU, SESE Colloquium. [7]  Reufer, A., 2011. Collisions in Planetary Systems. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Bern. [8] Chambers, J. E. (1999), MNRAS, 304, 703-799. 2091.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
