 MODELING THE GEOPHYSICAL HISTORY OF VERY LARGE IMPACT BASINS: THE GRAVITY ANOMALIES OF THE ORIENTALE BASIN. D. M. Blair1,*, B. C. Johnson1, A. M. Freed1, and H. J. Melosh1. 1,* Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, dblair@purdue.edu. !! Introduction: Anomalies in a planet's gravitational field have long been used to expose structures buried deep in the subsurface. By analyzing the locations and magnitudes of "mascons" (mass concentrations) [e.g., 1] and "masdefs" (mass deficits), recent work has shown that the gravitational signatures of the large peak-ringed lunar impact basins Humorum and Freundlich-Sharonov formed via a combination of syn- and post-impact processes [2, 3]. Models of the formation of these basins, therefore, can be used to constrain both the parameters of the impact itself and of the geophysical environment in which they evolved. Both the Humorum and Freundlich-Sharonov basins have annular masdefs with diameters of ~400 km (Dmasdef), and in the past we have approximated these basins as existing on a planar surface. For much larger basins, however, the curvature of the surface becomes important, as does the decreased depth-to-diameter ratio of large impact basins. Here we model the multi-ringed lunar Orientale Basin (Dmasdef ~ 600 km), whose size, comparatively young age, and minimal amount of mare fill make it an ideal place to study such issues. Observational constraints: The gravity anomalies of large impact basins on the Moon are generally characterized by a "bulls-eye" pattern. Visible in both the free-air and Bouguer anomalies of Orientale Basin,  this pattern consists of a central mascon, a surrounding annular masdef, and, in the free-air anomaly, a distal annular mascon  (Fig. 1). We use gravity data for the Moon from a spherical harmonic expansion of data from NASA's dual Gravity Reconnaissance And Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) spacecraft to degree and order 420 [4], and lunar topography from NASA's Lunar Orbital Laser Altimeter instrument aboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO/LOLA) at a grid resolution of 16 pixels/ degree [5] (Fig. 1, top row). To constrain our models, we take an azimuthal average of points along small circles centered on the mascon at the center of Orientale Basin, sampling 360 points around each small circle and spacing the small circles at radial increments of 5 km, and then adjusting the plot such that the surface is at 0 km elevation at 800 km, to match our model setup (Fig. 1, bottom row). Fig 1. Observational constraints for the Orientale Basin. Each constraint (free-air gravity anomaly, Bouguer gravity anomaly, and topography) is shown both in map-view and as an azimuthal average around a point in the center of the mascon, with error bars representing 1σ variation in values around the basin. Vertical grey lines represent the positions of the Inner Rook, Outer Rook, and Cordillera ranges. Gravity data is from a degree-and-order 420 spherical harmonic expansion of GRAIL data [4], and topography is from 16 pixel/degree LOLA data [5].   In addition to the gravity anomaly and topography data, our models of Orientale Basin must take into account the position of the three major mountain ranges—ring faults—surrounding the basin [e.g., 6]. While the exact formation mechanism of these faults is unknown, our models will ideally be able to help discern whether these faults occur during basin formation or at some point later in its history. As our models are unable to reproduce such faults, however, they are also likely to be areas of misfit in our results. Methods: Our modeling approach generally follows that used in our previous work on lunar mascons [2, 3], with some additions. This approach consists of combining two different types of numerical models—a hydrocode to simulate the short-term formation of the basin through crater collapse (a period of several hours), and a finite element model to simulate the long-term geophysical evolution of the basin over geologic time (hundreds of millions of years). In this manner, we are able to create a selfconsistent simulation of the basin's entire history from the moment of impact to the present day. The specifics of this approach are discussed in more detail below. Unlike our previous work, we perform models of Orientale both on flat and curved surfaces, to explore the effects of surface curvature on basin evolution. For the finite element models in particular the implementation of curvature is non-trivial, requiring the creation of new techniques for both running the models and calculating the resulting gravity anomalies. These additions allow us to model even large basins like Orientale, which subtends ~32º of longitude. Hydrocode modeling. We use the iSALE hydrocode [e.g., 7, 8] to simulate crater formation through the crater collapse phase, until the basin has reached a steady state in terms of gross physical motion (typically several hours after impact). We vary the diameter D of the impactor (and therefore, given assumptions about velocity, its kinetic energy), the preimpact crustal thickness, and the subsurface thermal gradient at the time of impact, and attempt to find a solution that, after geologic evolution, matches modern gravity anomaly and topography observations. Finite element modeling. We translate the final geometry, thermal structure, and density structure of the hydrocode model into the initial conditions for an axisymmetric finite element model (FEM) using the Abaqus software suite. The FEM simulates the isostatic relaxation of the basin and the cooling of the pool of melted mantle material, covering a time period of ~500 Ma. We include temperaturedependent viscosity and density structures and density-dependent gravity. Preliminary Results: Modeling for these basins is ongoing. Our initial results, however, show that a smaller impactor (D = 60 km) in a curved model produces results similar to the larger impactor (70 km) employed in our earlier flat models [9] (Fig. 2). Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NASA Headquarters under the NASA Earth and Space Science Fellowship Program, Grant NNX13AO63H, and by the GRAIL mission. We gratefully acknowledge the developers of iSALE, including Gareth Collins, Kai Wünnemann, Boris Ivanov, and Dirk Elbeshausen. References: [1] Muller, P. M., and Sjogren, W. L. (1968) Science 161, 680. [2] Melosh, H. J., et al. (2013) Science 340, 1552. [3] Freed, A. M., et al. (2014), The Formation of Lunar Mascon Basins from Impact to Contemporary Form, in prep. [4] Zuber, M. T., et al. (2013) Science 339, 668. [5] Neumann, G.A. (2010), NASA PDS. [6] Head, J. W. (1974) Moon, 11, 327. [7] Amsden, A. A., et al. (1980) LANL Rep. LA-8095, 101. [8] Wünnemann, K., et al. (2006) Icarus 180, 514. [9] Blair, D. M., et al. (2013), LPSC, #2821. Fig 2. Hydrocode results, showing the thermal structure after crater collapse for a pre-impact thermal gradient of 20 K km-1 (top) and 30 K km-1 (bottom) in the crust; both thermal profiles become adiabatic at 1300 K. Both models show an impactor of D = 60 km striking the moon at 15 km s-1. Plots are axisymmetric, with the center of the basin shown at left. 