2109.PDF
False positives for extrasolar life, and how to account for them.  S. D. Domagal-Goldman1,6, Antígona Segura2,6, M. W. Claire3,6, T. D. Robinson4,6, V. S. Meadows5,6, 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (shawn.goldman@nasa.gov), 2Universidad Nacional Antónoma de México (antigona@nucleares.unam.mx), 3University of St. Andrews, 4ORAU, in residence at NASA Ames, 5University of Washington Astronomy Department, 6Virtual Planetary Laboratory   Introduction:  Oxygen (O2) and Ozone (O3) are two of the more commonly-cited biosignature gases for future life-detection and planet characterization missions. In this presentation, we discuss the possibility for abiotic processes to produce these gases and examine the chemical and stellar contexts for these processes. Specifying these contexts and their observables will lead to a discussion on how false positives can be discriminated from true positives, and what the implications are for the capabilities of future exoplanet characterization missions. Methodology: We use an altitude-dependent photochemistry model to simulate non-biological atmospheric  O2 and O3 concentrations, across four critical model parameters: 1) the stellar UV flux to the habitable zone; 2) the O content of the atmosphere, driven by the CO2 concentration; 3) the flux of reductants to the atmosphere, driven by H2 outgassing; and 4) the fate of atmospheric species, driven by submarine volcanism.  Results: The results indicate near-modern-day O2 (4.6x1024 molecules/cm2) and O3 (8.6x1018 molecules/cm2) column densities for many of our simulations (Figure 1). More troublingly, in some model runs with high O3, we also model high CH4. Therefore, the simultaneous detection of O3 and CH4 may not be a strong biosignature. However, the O2 concentrations in these atmospheres are orders of magnitude lower than modern-day values. Further, in simulations where O2 concentrations are high, CH4 concentrations are negligible. In other words, in none of our simulations do we have detectable O2 and detectable CH4. Therefore, the simultaneous detection of these two gases remains a strong biosignature. An improved context, and strengehtened interpretation of the presence/absence of life can come from quantification of the CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere, the UV flux from the host star, and determination of the redox state of the atmosphere (likely through CH4 concentrations).  Conclusions:  The search for life on extrasolar planets should not only focus on the biosignature gases O2, O3, and CH4, but also on the contextual information needed to discriminate between false and true positives. Specifically, the inclusion of CH4 in a search for life via O2/O3 detection is critical. If CH4 cannot be detected, constaints on the CO2 concentration and the UV flux from the star can at least indiaate conditions for which false positives are a possibility. Figure 1. Color contours of O3 column densities as a function of star type (different panels), CO2 concentration (x-axes), and the outgassing rate of H2 (y-axes). All panels assume low submarine volcanism rates relative to modern-day Earth. These submarine volcanism rates, and the low H2 outgassing for which O2 densities are high, indicate the importance for quantifying the redox state of the atmospohere with CH4 observations. 2109.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
