 IRON-NICKEL SULFIDE EXSOLUTION TEXTURES IN CM2 CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES. S. A. Singerling and A. J. Brearley, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, MSC03-2040, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131. Email: ssingerling@unm.edu.   Introduction:  Sulfide minerals are a relatively minor but ubiquitous component of all chondritic meteorites and have the potential to provide constraints on processes that occurred at intermediate to low temperatures in the solar nebula and on asteroidal parent bodies. However, the mechanisms of sulfide formation in chondrites still remains enigmatic. Sulfide minerals can clearly form as a result of nebular processes, but secondary alteration on asteroidal parent bodies can also result in the formation of sulfide minerals, by interaction of aqueous fluids with primary sulfides or metals. We have recently been reevaluating the sulfide mineralogy of the CM carbonaceous chondrites in an effort to understand the origins of the complex sulfide assemblages in these meteorites. This group of meteorites records both processes that occurred in the solar nebula as well as a history of interaction with aqueous fluids that has resulted in variable alteration effects in different CM chondrites. The CM chondrites have a sulfide mineralogy that consists of pyrrhotite (po), pentlandite (pn), and a sulfide of intermediate composition [1, 2], but appear to lack troilite. The absence of troilite and the presence of pyrrhotite and pentlandite have generally been considered to be the result of aqueous alteration of troilite and/or Fe,Ni metal during parent body aqueous alteration [3, 4]. Although secondary sulfide minerals have clearly formed as a result of aqueous alteration, there is an increasing body of evidence that at least a population of these phases are primary and formed in the nebular environment [5-7].  The formation of sulfides in the solar nebula could occur by crystallization from mss melts in chondrules during chondrule formation as suggested by [5, 7]. In this study, we are exploring the textural and compositional characteristics of sulfide grains in CM chondrites in an effort to constrain whether they are of primary or secondary origin and to use their textural characteristics to constrain their formation mechanisms. In particular, we are focusing on the complex, fine-scale exsolution textures in po-pn composite grains (Fig. 1), which we have recently demonstrated are quite widespread in weakly to moderately altered CMs [5, 6].  This work continues on our preliminary investigations to better characterize these textures. The specific questions that we are addressing in this study are: 1) Can the sulfides be classified into distinct textural groups?, 2) If so, are these textural groups limited to a single meteorite or are they seen in multiple meteorites?, and 3) Are the sulfide compositions correlated with textural group? Our goal is to establish the factors that control the formation of these sulfide exsolution textures and use this information to constrain both their formation mechanisms and formation environment.  Fig. 1. Examples of exsolution textures in QUE 97990 sulfides. See Table 1 for descriptions of these textures.  (a) composite, (b) ragged blade, (c) snowflake, (d) high magnification pn rods and blades, (e) irregular lamellae.   Methods:  The sulfide grains studied in this work occur in Type IIA chondrules and as isolated grains in the matrix in a polished thin section of  the CM2 meteorite QUE 97990. We have compared these new observations with data collected previously on the CM chondrites TIL 91722, Mighei, Murchison, Crescent, and Murray [5, 6]. BSE images were obtained on a FEI Quanta 3D FEGSEM in the E&PS Dept. at UNM. WDS compositional data of sulfides in QUE 97990,31 were collected using a JEOL 8200 EPMA and Probe for EPMA software in the Institute of Meteoritics at UNM. Results: Each meteorite studied contains sulfides with a range of textures, but grains with similar textural characteristics occur in all the meteorites investigated. These similarities have allowed us to group the grains into different textural groups. Table 1 lists the textural group names, the number of sulfides displaying the texture, and a brief description of the texture. A total of 122 individual sulfide grains were studied with some grains showing both the snowflake and/or metal texture in addition to another group (i.e., a sulfide grain may be categorized as having "thick blades" in po and then also have the snowflake texture in pn grains within the same composite grain, as well as small metal grains).  Table 1. Sulfide exsolution texture groups. Texture # Description Ragged Blade 6 Elongate blades of pn propagating  from cracks and grain edges. Ragged, porous texture of overall grain. Composite 7 Po grains with pn as patches on grain boundaries. Irregular Lamellae 8 Irregular, variable thickness lamellae of pn in po. Sparse  Lamellae 5 Few linear lamellae of pn in po. Concentrated Lamellae 9 Thinner, linear lamellae of pn which are concentrated in part of the po. Irregular Patches 3 Sub-micron scale rods and irregular patches of pn in interiors of po grains. Thick Blades 5 Thick blades of pn concentrated in part of the po. Pn Rims 14 Po grains with sometimes continuous rims of pn. Flames 4 Flame-like intergrowth texture of tr and po. Chevron 5 Fine-scale chevron-like texture of pn and po. Metals 12 Presence of <1 µm Fe,Nimetals in the interior of po-pn grains. Snowflake 58 Dendritic to graphic po located in patches of pn.  Single point electron microprobe analyses from 18 sulfides in QUE 97990 are presented in Fig. 2. All compositions fall along po-pn tie-lines consistent with the phase diagram of [8] at 1 atm and 500°C.  Discussion: The textures observed in the sulfide grains in the CMs studied are consistent with cooling of mss from moderate temperatures based on experiments [9]. This is strong evidence against a low temperature alteration origin.  It has been stated by other authors that the exsolution textures which form in popn are a strong function of cooling rate and initial Nicontent of the mss [9, 10]. The different exsolution textures demonstrate that individual sulfide grains record different cooling rates from temperatures at which pentlandite forms from mss (~600°C) [10].  This implies that, in all the chondrites studied, the sulfide grains exhibit a range of different cooling histories consistent with a nebular environment for the formation of the exsolution. Although similar po-pn exsolution textures have been found in all 6 of the CM chondrites we have studied, the flame texture that occurs in po-tr grains has only been observed in Crescent and TIL 91722. The variable occurrence of this texture in different CM chondrites may be indicative of distinctive low temperature thermal histories on the CM parent body that only some chondrites experienced.    Fig. 2. Fe-Ni-S ternary phase diagram (in atomic %) showing the compositional ranges of mss and pn (red fields) at 1 atm and 500°C after [8]. The open circles represent the single point analyses from the sulfides in QUE 97990. They fall along po-pn tie-lines consistent with the aforementioned P-T conditions.  Conclusions: In this study, we have identified and defined different textural groups of sulfides whose characteristics are consistent with decomposition of mss to form po-pn exsolution during cooling at different rates from high temperature. The range of textures observed in individual grains in any given meteorite implies that these grains experienced different cooling histories consistent with an origin for the exsolution textures in a nebular environment. Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Mike Spilde for assistance on the electron microprobe and Rhian Jones and Jon Lewis for useful discussion. This work was supported by NASA Cosmochemistry grant grant NNX11AK51G to AJ Brearley (PI). References: [1] Ramdohr P. (1963) JGR, 68, 2011. [2] Nazarov M. A. et al. (1996) LPS XXVII, Abstract #939. [3] Fuchs L. H. et al. (1973) Sm. Contr. Earth Sci., 10, 1-39. [4] Bullock E. S. et al. (2007) LPS XXXVIII, Abstract #2057. [5] Brearley A. J.  and Martinez C. (2010) LPS XLIII, Abstract #1438. [6] Maldonado E. M. and Brearley A. J. (2011) LPS XLII, Abstract #2271. [7] Harries D. and Langenhorst F. (2013) MAPS, 48, 879-903. [8] Misra K. C. and Fleet M. E. (1973) Econ. Geol. 68, 518-39. [9] Durazzo A. and Taylor L. A. (1982) Min. Dep., 17, 313-32. [10] Vaughan D. J. and Craig J. R. (1997) In Geochem. of Hydro. Ore Dep., ed. by Barnes. New York: Wiley. pp. 367-434.  