 LABORATORY SIMULATION OF MARTIAN RECURRING SLOPE LINEAE (RSL): ORIGIN AND DETECTABILITY OF LIQUID BRINES.  M. Massé 1, P. Beck 2, S.J. Conway 3, J. Gargani 4, A. McEwen 5, B. Schmitt 2, M. Patel 3, G. Jouannic 6, L. Ojha 7, A. Pommerol 8.  1 IAS, Bat. 121, Université Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay, France (mmasse@ias.u-psud.fr),  2 IPAG, 414 Rue de la Piscine, 38400 St-Martin d'Hères, France, 3 Open University, Milton Keynes, UK, 4 IDES, Université Paris Sud, 91405 Orsay, France, 5 LPL, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA, 6 Cerema, LRPC Nancy, 54510 Tomblaine, France, 7 School of Earth an Atmospheric Scinces, Atlanta, USA, 8 Universtat Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland.  Introduction:  If water has likely flowed on Mars in its early history, the current presence of liquid water is debatable. However, some recently discovered features named "Recurring Slope Lineae" (RSL) suggest that superficial liquid can occur on present day Mars in a transient state [1]. RSL are dark (up to 40% darker than the surrounding areas), narrow (0.5-5 m) (Fig. 1) and are mostly found in the southern mid-latitudes. Repeated MRO/HiRISE images reveal that they appear and grow during warm seasons and fade and disappear during cold seasons. They develop on steep slopes (25°-40°), favoring equator-facing slopes, times and places with peak temperatures of ~250-300K.  The morphological description of RSL indicates that the most likely formation process involves the presence of liquid [2]. Moreover, the thermodynamic stability of brines and the extensive presence of salts suggest that metastable liquid brines could occur today on the Martian surface [3,4]. Despite these lines of evidences, there remain two problems: (1) how to explain the absence of clear spectral signatures of liquid water at RSL locations [5] and (2) what is the initiation mechanism for RSL? In order to respond to these two remaining problems, the aim of our study is to reproduce the composition and the triggering of RSL with laboratory experiments.  Fig. 1: RSL observed in Newton Crater (HiRISE image, ESP_022689_1380). Spectroscopy and detectability of liquid brines: Aim: The goal of this study is to reproduce in the laboratory hydration and dehydration cycles of different kind of brines mixed with basaltic powder. These experiments aim to understand the spectroscopic behavior of brines during these processes and therefore determine the diagnostic spectral features that we can expect to find for Martian RSL. Methods: We have used the combination of the IPAG bidirectional reflectance spectrometer [6] with the simulation chamber "SERAC" [7].  Fig. 2: Series of spectra acquired during a) dehydration of an MgSO4 solution mixed with basalt powder and b) progressive hydration of a dry FeSO4/basalt powder mixture.   For the dehydration experiments, we wetted a basalt powder with a brine solution. The sample was placed in ambient atmosphere and heated at 308 K. In both sets of experiments a spectrum was acquired every hour. For the hydration experiments, we started with a dry mixture of basalt powder with 10% by mass of one of the 3 salts. The samples were placed in the SERAC chamber which was put under vacuum and we then progressively introduced an increasing quantity of water vapor. Main results: The results of these laboratory experiments (Fig. 2) demonstrate that the absence of spectral identification of liquid water at RSL sites does not rule out the liquid brine hypothesis. The observed albedo variations of RSL are in agreement with our experiments and, thus, with cycles of wetting/drying. The experiments also reveal an important decoupling between the evolution of albedo and the evolution of  hydration bands depths. During most of the wetting/drying process we find that a very low albedo is associated with very shallow H2O absorption bands. Hence, unless the orbital CRISM data are acquired during a favorable time of day for liquid formation, the data will not display strong hydration signatures despite the presence of low albedo features.   Initiation mechanism of RSL:   Aim: One of the main problem of the liquid hypothesis for RSL, concerns the origin of a sufficient quantity of liquid for triggering the flow. One of the latest hypothesis suggests the summer melting of nearsurface ice, accumulated in the bedrock during summer [8]. The objective of these new experiments is to reproduce the initation and the flow of RSL, through the melting of ice under terrestrial and martian conditions. Methods: These experiments have been performed for both terrestrial and martian pressures. For terrestrial pressure we used the cold room (Fig. 3c) at IDES laboratory (Orsay, France). For martian pressure (6 mbar) we used the Mars chamber (Fig. 3b) at the Open University (Milton Keynes, UK). For both experiments, a block of ice was placed at the top of a 30° slope (Fig. 3a) at ambient temperature (around 190K). The ice was covered by basalt in order to prevent from sublimation effect. We used different compositions of ice (pure or briny) and various thickness and grainsizes for the sand covering the slope. First results: The main result from this first set of experiments is that slowly melting ice is able to produce a temporary surface flow, even for pure ice at Martian pressure (Fig. 3b). In both cases, the flow is linear and looks like RSL. The main difference that we observe between flows under terrestrial and martian conditions is in their fine-scale morphology. The increased stability of water under terrestrial conditions results in the formation of channels with a terminal sedimentary deposit (Fig. 3c). The lack of topographic expression in the martian case is consistent with the nearly complete disappearance of RSL observed on Mars during winter. These first experiments also reveal that, due to their higher viscosity, briny flows are shorter than pure water flow, but are active for longer periods of time.  Fig. 3: a) Set-up of flowing experiments for pure water ice at b) Martian pressure and c) Terrestrial pressure.  Conclusions: Our two sets of laboratory experiments demonstrate that the formation of RSL by a liquid is consistent with spatial observations and Martian conditions. The melting of seasonal near-surface ice is able to produce a liquid flow at Martian conditions. This kind of flow only induce a simple percolation of liquid in the porous soil without any formation of erosional morphologies. In this case, the presence of a liquid film at the surface never happens. As the spectral detection of liquid is only possible for a very wet surface at CRISM resolution, the detection of liquid brines on RSL is very rarely possible. If pure water seems sufficient to create RSL, liquid brines are more likely regarding their higher stability at Martian conditions. References: [1] McEwen et al. (2011) Science, 333, 740-743. [2] Ojha et al. (2014), Icarus, in press. [3] Gough et al. (2011) EPSL, 312, 371-377. [4] Chevrier al al. (2009) JGR, 114, E06001. [5] Ojha et al. (2013), GRL, 40, 5621-5626. [6] Brissaud O. et al. (2004) App. Optics, 43, 1926-1937. [7] Pommerol et al. (2009) Icarus, 204, 114-136. [8] Grimm et al. (2014), Icarus, in press. 