 IMPACT MELT VOLUMES IN SIMPLE LUNAR CRATERS: CONSTRAINTS ON MODELING.  J. B. Plescia1, O. Barnouin1, and J. Stopar2. 1Applied Physics Laboratory, The Johns Hopkins University, Laurel MD 20723. 2School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287.   Introduction:  Impact melt is a typical product produced during the cratering process as a result of the intense heating of the target usually because of pressure decompression, but also possible because of shear heating (Figure 1). Melt is observed on all of the terrestrial planets in both simple and complex craters [16]. High-resolution data for the Moon now allows impact melt deposits to be characterized with much greater fidelity than in the past or on the other terrestrial planets as they are imaged at lower resolution (e.g., Mercury and Venus) or have widespread dust coatings (Mars). Recognition that lunar craters as small as ~200 m in diameter have well-defined impact melt deposits on their floors [7] was unexpected, based as consideration of theoretical modeling and consideration that much of the melt would be ejected [8-11]. For craters in the hundreds of meter diameter range, the predicted volume of impact melt was so small that most should have been ejected from the crater and insufficient volume would have been available to pool on the floor. The observation that small diameter craters did have melt, led to the questions of the amount of melt that was present and the extent to which the theoretical models were correct with respect to the amount of melt produced during an impact.   Figure 1. Lunar melt crater. Crater diameter 5100 m; melt pond is about 1380 x 800 m.  To address the question of the volume of melt produced during impacts on the Moon, we have examined simple craters and estimated the melt volume on the floor. Simple craters were used as their shape is easily approximated, and the uncertain effects of rebound and central uplifts in complex craters are not present. These estimates, in turn, can be used to provide empirical constraints for the theoretical models and also to explore possible variations in the amount of melt produced as a function of target characteristics (mare vs. highlands) and impact energy (crater size). Technique: LROC images [12] were searched to locate images of simple craters on both the mare and highlands that contained identifiable melt deposits on their floor. Many lunar craters have flat floors, only those with a morphology indicative of melt (Figure 1) were used. Such morphologic indicators include a flat low-albedo floor, an abrupt contact between the floor and the wall, tension cracks, and morphologies indicative of fluid flow. Fresh craters with well-defined melt pools, particularly at small diameters, are relatively rare. For those craters that had recognizable melt pools, the LOLA database [13] was searched to determine if a LOLA profile crossed the crater center. Estimates of the melt volume on the crater floor are derived using a LOLA profile centered over the crater (Figure 2). LOLA profiles have sufficient data spacing such that craters in the hundred of meters diameter range can studied. However, because LRO is in a polar orbit, the profiles are all oriented north-south, with across-track distances usually too large to easily perform analyses at other azimuths. LROC NAC stereo data can also be used, but are few in number; the LRO WAC DTM data are too coarse for such an analysis. A portion of the crater wall below the rim and above the melt pool is defined for both sides of the crater. A variable order function is then fit to this defined portion of the profile. The continuous function fitted to the crater wall is considered to be an approximation of the original crater profile. Assuming axial symmetry, the original crater volume can be calculated. Using the observed profile, the present volume can be calculated. The difference between the observed volume and the calculated volume represents the volume of melt. This volume estimate should be taken with several caveats: any debris that accumulated on the floor before the melt was deposited will result in an over estimation of the melt; the estimate does not include any melt that was ejected from the crater or which coats the walls; in terrestrial craters (e.g., Brent [5]) melt is observed within the debris layer on the crater floor and this melt would not be included. While significant, these uncertainties are not so large that an  order-of-magnitude estimate of the impact melt volume cannot be made.   Figure 2. Profile across melt crater. "x" denotes LOLA elevation points; the purple line is the portion of the crater wall used to fit the profile; modeled profile is shown in blue; blue shaded represents melt volume.  Results:  Figure 3 illustrates the estimated melt volume for simple lunar craters examined in this study. In general, the estimated volumes lie below the modelderived estimates of volume. These models do include an estimate of the melt lost by excavation, following the approach of [10]. Clearly, as the crater diameter increases, the total energy of the event and the volume of impact melt increases. Some of the scatter in the data probably reflects imprecise calculations and geologic noise - the randomness of the details of crater formation and synimpact processes (e.g., landslides). In general, the data suggest that the volumes are considerably below the theoretical values, although some estimates are greater.    Figure 3. Melt volume estimates as a function of diameter. Blue dots indicate estimates for lunar simple craters; red diamonds are terrestrial crater estimates; green line is the predicted lunar volume from the model of [10].  Discussion: Most of the data appear to lie below the modeled volume. The difference between the observed and modeled values are significant; they can differ by orders-of-magnitude. Some data points lie above the expected values, although these appear to be typically associated with the smaller diameter range. There are larger relative uncertainties associated with small diameter craters. As noted above, the estimate does not include melt that is ejected from the crater, or buried beneath the crater floor; however ejected melt and buried melt volumes are expected to be far less than the volume of the pooled melt. From the data at hand, it would appear that the models generally over estimate the volume of impact melt. It should be noted that the modeling [e.g., 10] uses estimates of impact melt volume from terrestrial craters as calibration points. As [10] notes, these estimates are highly uncertain and perhaps they are too large. The two terrestrial craters that lie below the model line in Figure 3 are the Ries and Logoisk structures, craters formed in sedimentary targets. The data were also examined to determine if there were differences in the amount of melt estimated for mare and highland craters. Within the sample population, there is no significant difference in estimates for mare and highlands craters; for both targets, estimates are greater and less than the model values.  Summary: Estimates of the volume of impact melt produced in simple lunar craters suggests that the volume produced is significantly less than that predicted by the models. Differences between the estimates and the model values are too large to be explained by uncertainties in the estimate. Both highland and mare craters show the same level of difference. Data to date would suggest that the models generally over estimate the volume of melt produced during an impact. Additional questions to be addressed include whether there are effects associated with layered target or layer thickness (e.g., mare over basin ejecta) or with size. References: [1] Howard, K. and Wilshire, H. (1975) J. Res. USGS, 3, 237-251. [2] Hawke, B. R., and Head, J. W. (1977) Impact and Explosion Cratering, Pergamon, 815-841. [3] Denevi, B., et al. (2012) Icarus, 219, 655-675. [4] Bray, V., et al. (2010) GRL, 37, L.21202, doi:10.1029/2010GL044666. [5] Dence, M. (1971) JGR, 76, 5552-5565. [6] Grieve, R. (1978) Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf., 9th, 2579-2608. [7] Plescia, J. and Cintala, M. (2012) JGR, 117, doi:10.1029/ 2011JE003941. [8] Orphal, D., et al. (1980) Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. 11th, 2309-2323. [9] Pierazzo, E., et al. (1997) Icarus, 127, 408-423. [10] Cintala, M. and Grieve, R. (1998) Met. Planet. Sci., 33, 889-912. [11] Pierazzo, E., and Melosh, J. (2000) Icarus, 145, 252-261. [12] Robinson, M. S., et al., (2010) Space Sci. Rev., 150, 81-124. [13] Zuber, M. T., et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev., 150, 63-80. 