2149.PDF
THE  RESURFACING  AND  BOMBARDMENT HISTORY OF  SATURN’S  MOON  DIONE  FROM  ITSGLOBAL CRATER DATABASE.  M. R. Kirchoff1 and P. Schenk2.  1Southwest Research Institute, Boulder CO(kirchoff@boulder.swri.edu). 2Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston TX (schenk@lpi.usra.edu).Introduction: From  analysis of impact craters andsurface morphology using Voyager images researchersdiscovered Saturn’s moon Dione has an interesting andunique history [e.g., 1-3]. Two terrains of great interestwere identified – “wispy terrain” on the trailing hemisphere and “smooth plains” on the leading – along withthe possibility of multiple impactor populations. However, the formation timing and mechanisms for terrainson Dione,  and the bombardment history, could not bereliably determined from the modest Voyager imaging.Cassini ISS cameras  have  provided higher resolutionimages and global coverage of several of the Saturniansatellites,  including  Dione.  Analyzing  these  imagesyields new information on the extent and formation ofDione's unique terrains  and its bombardment history.In previous work [4,5],  we presented preliminary results  on  compiling  and  analyzing  a  “global”  craterdatabase  for  diameters  (D)  ≥4  km.  Here  we  nowpresent the complete database and improved inferencesfor Dione's resurfacing and bombardment history. Methods: The database  is  built  by measuring  theposition and diameter of identified impact craters oncontrolled  Cassini ISS  images of Dione.  Images usedhave pixel scales ranging from ~200-400 m/pixel  andsolar incidence angles between 45-80º.  Therefore, wechose a conservative  D=4 km for the database  minimum to avoid issues related to resolution or incidenceangle. The  total area  encompassed by the database isindicated by all colored regions in Fig. 1a.After the crater database is completed, spatial craterdensity  maps  are  generated  using  a  counting  circleanalysis (e.g., Figs. 1b, c). In this analysis, a circle of10º radius is positioned every 5º in latitude and longitude and the number of craters  within the defined diameter range per circle area is computed. Densities calculated near the area boundary (black lines in Figs. 1b,c) are excluded due to edge effects. Using  these  spatial  density  maps  and  the  originalimages, geologic units (colored regions in Fig. 1a) arethen subjectively defined based upon changes in craterdensity and  surface morphology (e.g., surface roughness). The crater size-frequency distributions (CSFDs)are then presented for each unit in the relative (R) plotformat [6; Fig. 2].  Symbol colors in the R-plot (Fig. 2)correspond to unit colors in Fig. 1a.Results: We  have  identified  7 geologic  units  forDione (Figs. 1a, 2). The red and orange units have thehighest crater density  and  are called  the  “Red or Orange Dense Cratered Terrain (RDCT or ODCT)”. Theonly difference between the two is that the red unit hasa higher crater density for D<10 km (Fig. 1b). The yellow unit, which we call the “Average Cratered Terrain(ACT)”,  has  a  slightly  lower  crater  density  than  theRDCT/ODCT, but  is  higher than the  other units. Thegreen  unit,  which  covers  most  of  the  trailing  hemisphere, has lower crater density for D<30 km than theACT,  but  equivalent  density  for  larger  craters.  Thisunit also contains the “wispy terrain”, large  fault  systems,  and  several  impact  basins  (D>100 km);  therefore, we call this the “Fault and Basin Terrain (FBT)”.The blue-green unit, which covers most of the leadinghemisphere,  has  higher  crater  density  for  D<10  kmthan the FBT, but lower density for larger craters. Thisunit also has a smooth morphology, so we call it the“Smooth  Terrain  (ST)”.  The  blue  unit,  which  is  thesmallest, has a unique crater distribution with a verylow crater density for D<10 km increasing up to a veryhigh crater density for large craters. This unit also contains  four  relatively  fresh,  large  (D>60  km)  craters;therefore, we call  it the “Recent Large Craters Terrain(RLCT)”. Finally, the purple unit, which is located onEvander basin, has a  low crater density at all diameters. Due to this unit's location we call it the “EvanderTerrain (ET)”.Discussion:  The RDCT and ET are the only unitsthat do not have a decreasing crater density for  D<10km (Fig. 2). We suggest this can be explained by eitherof two possibilities. (1) Some process(es) is increasingsmall crater density on these two  units and the otherunits' CSFDs  represent  the  primary  small  impactorSFD. (2) Some process(es) is removing small craterson the other  terrains  and the RDCT and ET CSFDsrepresent  the  primary  small impactor  SFD.  We notethat an evolving small impactor population is NOT thelikely answer as both CSFD shapes are seen on terrainsof varying relative ages (vertical position in Fig. 2).In  support of  hypothesis  #1,  the  decreasing  smallcrater density is seen on other inner saturnian satellites:Mimas, Enceledus, and Tethys [7,8]. Furthermore, theET small crater density could be increased by formation of Evander secondary craters  [8]. However, it  isnot clear how the RDCT small crater density would beincreased.  No recent  basins  are  found  near this unit,nor is it located  on the hemisphere opposite (trailing)to Evander (leading) where “sesquinaries” (ejecta thatescapes  the  satellite,  then  impacts  [e.g.,  9])  are  expected to form [10]. The latter may imply further workshould be done on sesquinary formation, especially forbasins formed at  high latitudes.  Moreover,  the varia2149.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
tion seen in the CSFD shape for  D>20 km among theother units cannot be explained.In  support of  hypothesis  #2,  there  is  considerableobservational evidence on Dione for processes that effectively erase small craters:  cratering,  tectonism,  andcryovolcanism. In the ODCT, ACT, and RLCT, observations of large craters suggests that subsequent cratering would be the primary process. Meanwhile, withinthe FBT, observations of faults and recent, large cratersimplies  tectonism and cratering are the processes acting there.  Finally,  the observations of  volcanic ventsand smooth surface [11]  and few large craters  withinthe  ST,  indicates  that  cryovolcanism  is  the  process.However,  again the reason why the RDCT retained ahigher small crater density is not clear.Conclusion: Cassini ISS imaging has allowed us togather  a  near-global  crater  database  for  D≥4 km forDione. From the database we have deduced the extentand relative formation age of seven terrains on Dione'ssurface, two of which appear to be a result of resurfacing by  non-impact processes. However, Dione's bombardment history is still inconclusive, although evolving impactor populations seem unlikely.References: [1] Smith, B.A., et al. (1981) Science 212, p.163-91. [2]Smith, B.A., et al. (1982) Science 215, p.504-37. [3] Morrison, D., etal.  (1984) in  Saturn.  Univ. Arizona Press,  p.609-39. [4]  Kirchoff,M.R. & Schenk, P. (2010) LPSC XLI, Abst. #1455. [5] Kirchoff, M.& Schenk P. (2011)  EPSC-DPS,  Abst.  #1545.  [6] Crater AnalysisTechniques Working Group (1979) Icarus 37, p.467-74. [7] Kirchoff,M.R. & Schenk, P.,  Icarus 206, p.485-97. [8] Bierhaus,  E.B, et al.(2012) Icarus 218, p.602-21. [9] Zahnle, K., et al. (2008) Icarus 194,p.660-74.  [10] Alvarellos,  J.L.,  et al. (2005)  Icarus 178, p.104-23.[11] Schenk, P.M. & J.M. Moore (2009) LPSC XL, Abst. #2465.Fig 1. (a) Dione geologic units defined by this work. Crater density for (b) D=4-10 km and (c) D=10-100 km. Hotter colors = higher density.(b)(c)RDiameter, kmFig 2. Crater size-frequency distributions (CSFDs) in R-plot format for geologic units shown in Fig. 1a. Symbol colors for each CSFD correspond to those for the unit in Fig. 1a. Errors are √N, where N is the number of craters in each bin. (a)2149.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
