 Mixing of Nebular Components in the Earliest Solar System and "The Road Not Taken(1)".  Jeremy S.  Delaney,  Dept  of  Chemistry  &  Chemical  Biology,  Rutgers  University,  610  Taylor  Rd,  Piscataway, NJ08854, (jsd@rci.rutgers.edu) Introduction:  Mixing of oxygen reservoirs to explain  variations  of  oxygen  isotope  signatures among different meteorite classes has been long recognized(2).  The majority of   samples measured are solid planetary, or meteoritic components. Gas and liquid samples are rare. The known range of values in all solar system materials including atmospheres(3) is  ∆17O > +150 to  ∆17O  ≈-50 is  large (Figure 1a) whereas most planetary and  meteoritic samples plot close to the  terrestrial fractionation line (TFL), ∆17O = 0+/-2, in the Clayton-Mayeda diagram (Fig 1). If the solar nebula was radially stratified with respect  to  volatile  components,  ices  dominated  the cold outermost solar system (>5-10AU). The ices of the  solar  system  are  the  major  oxygen  reservoir other  than  the  Sun  and  the  rocky portions  of  the planets. Perhaps 10-20 M⊕ of ices exist today in the Kuiper Belt-Oort cloud region. Abundant H2O in the early nebula presumably migrated outward from the protosun, nucleating ice crystals as it moved. The effect  of  water  on minerals  that  acted as nucleation sites for the crystallizing ices is explored. Stoichiometric  constraints on oxygen isotope ratios  in  nebular processes. Representative  reactions for incorporation of O2   into solid silicates to form the dominant olivine in chondrites (4) (c.f. Eq.1) or  for  hydration  of  chondritic  assemblages  (Eq.2) may be mass balanced with ∆17O values: 2MgSiO3+2Fe + H2O = [Mg2SiO4+Fe2SiO4]+H2 ....1 3Mg2SiO4 + 2H2O      =  2Mg3SiO5(OH)4 +SiO2  .....2 If the solar photosphere oxygen is representative of the earliest condensed silicates (∆17O ≅ -50), the water must have  ∆17O ~ +200, (comparable to values for  outer solar system - cometary ices (5)), to produce values of ∆17O ≈ 0 ±2, that are close to the majority  of  solids  measured  (Figure  1a).  For  silicates that had evolved up the  CCAM line to ∆17O ≈ -25 the water required  for reaction has ∆17O ~ +150. Hydrothermal modification (in 1-10 years) occurs in chondrites(6), but  these processes are usually considered to occur after  chondrule formation(7)  and hence after the establishment of oxygen isotope signatures.  If  hydrothermal  exchange  of  oxygen  between the  earliest forming solids in the solar system can occur,  i.e. prior to the major chondrite forming events,  then the paradox of heavily hydrated yet   Figure  1 (a)  Expanded  Clayton-Mayeda  (C-M)  diagram  for most nebular materials. Note length of ∆17O levers about the terrestrial fractionation line (TFL). (b) detail of C-M space that contains  most  meteoritic  samples  and,  probably,  the  rocky planets. compositionally  primitive  CI  meteorites  may  be  resolved.     The initial crystallization of anhydrous silicates by  evaporative and condensation processes(8)  close to the protosun, formed refractory oxides and silicates such as olivine that would likely have oxygen isotope signatures comparable with the photospheric values.  The  array  of  oxidized  minerals,  up  the CCAM mixing line, containing fossil chronometers, requires that nebular interaction with a heavy oxygen reservoir was occurring from the earliest times. The formation of ices with heavy oxygen requires the low temperatures found in the outer solar system, beyond the frost line(9).  The active circulation of solids across the frostline provides the trigger for the  isotopic  exchange  that  defines  the majority of materials in the solar system. Nucleation of ices on cooling refractory grains as  they move out  across  the frost line provides the reactant assemblages for isotope exchange. Warming of these aggregates by included 26Al, 53Mn, or if they returned to inner solar system provides the heat needed for exhange to occur. Alternately ice crystals near the inner part of the inside the frost 'line' could melt onto mineral grains and subsequent alteration reactions. Implications of mixing model for nebular oxygen: To  establish  the  range  of  oxygen  signatures  observed in  meteorites  the two reservoirs  of  oxygen must interact very early in the evolution of the nebula as anhydrous phases dating to that time already contain  the  oxyvgen  isotope  signatures.  System wide material exchange between the innermost and the outer solar nebula must occur.  If reaction controlled isotope mixing controls the observed oxygen signatures  of  meteoritic  materials,  then  there  are several implications. (1) The depletion of 'volatile' elements  (alkalis,  halogens,  etc.)  probably  reflects the  activity  of  acqueous  solution  rather  than  the presence of an unrecognized volatile component often invoked. The commonly observed depletion of K without associated evaporative mass fractionation(10) can be ascribed to  solubility controlled exchanges rather than evaporation. (2) Evaporite-mineral concentrations (Halite,  sylvite,  gypsum-anhydrite,  calcite, etc.) should exist on or in asteroids and comets. (3) Experimental studies of analogue systems to meteorites that do not include an initial hydrous component  may  inflate  temperatures  of  reaction.  (4) Subsolidus reaction (metamorphism) in  the nebula prior to the onset of melting is important. Metamorphism in early nebular  systems may resemble  the terrestrial crustal analogue, being dominated by prograde, dehydration reactions that later become thermally retrograde.  The rehydration associated with terrestrial retrograde metamorphism is generally absent.  (5)  The dissociation of H2O during prograde reactions has fundamental implications for oxygen fugacity during early nebular evolution. Increasing oxidation state in primitive systems should correlate with the increase of  ∆17O in meteorites as is often observed.  (6)  'Mudball'  parent  bodies  represent  a fundamental class of earliest solar system objects(11). (7) CI-chondrites, the most 'solar' meteorites, represent the least metamorphosed samples in the solar system.  This  is  consistent  with  their  metamorphic state and their compositional signatures. Their ∆17O (slightly > 0) may represent the natural 'base line' (CI-FL Fig 1a) for a revised scale of  nebular oxygen evolution representing as it does the mixture of components that have seen the typical stoichiometric reactions of nebular interaction on the trans-nebular  scale.  The  heavily 'altered'  character  of  these objects reflects the paucity of high temperature inner solar system processing except for recirculation of water in comets during their solar orbits. Conclusions:   While  classical  models  of  nebular components(4) have  focussed  on  the  broad  cosmochemical  classification  of  the  elements  into siderophile,  lithophile,  chalcophile,  and  atmophile elements(11)  a more focussed examination of the role of icy components(1) provides a potential solution to the long standing problem of the oxygen isotope diversity. That diversity is seen in the oxygen threeisotope  signatures  defined  at  the  earliest  nebular times.  Stoichiometric  hydration  reactions  of  the most  abundant  silicates  (eg.  enstatite  and  olivine) provide  realistic  analogues  to  observed  phases  in carbonaceous  chondrites  and  their  oxygen  isotope signatures.  Hydration phenomena may also explain the dominance of meteorites with ∆17O ≅ 0+/-2 in the solar system sample suite. Scatter of ∆17O near 0 reflects small variation in reaction conditions. H2O H2 buffering may control control the observed oxidation  states  of  nebular  materials  as  well  as  observed depletion of alkali elements in many planets and small bodies. The general increase in  fO2 with increasing ∆17O may be a reflection of this hydrogen buffer. Hydration reactions must occur very early (perhaps contemporaneous with CAI formation) to define  the discrete  oxygen regimes  in  which each meteorite group subsequently evolved and should be expected in all regions of the solar nebula ouside the evaporative zone close to the protosun. The establishment of a nebular thermal gradient outward from the evolving star, together with nebula-scale circulation, would be reflected in this process. The abundance  of  hydrated  phases  in  CI  chondrites  may therefore be a primary feature rather than the product of later alteration. (Subsequent reprocessing of CI's,  related  to  the  recrystallization  of  those  hydrated phases, is clearly required to account for the young ages of these objects). References : (1) Frost, R., 1920. 'Mountain interval' H Holt &Co, p. 76.; (2) Clayton, R.N. et al., 1976. EPSL 30 10; (3) Theimens, 1999. Science 283, 341. (4) Anders, E., 1964. Space Sci Rev 3, 583.; (5) Sakamoto et al.  2007.  Science 317, 231. (6) Dyl, et al. 2012. PNAS 109, 18306.; (7) Grossman,J, 1996. LPSC p. 467. (8) Grossman, L., 1972. GCA, 36, 597.  (9) Seto et  al,  2008.   GCA 72, 2723.  (10) Humayun, Clayton, 1995. GCA 59, 2131; (11) Bland, P.A. et al, 2013. LPSC #1447. (12) Goldschmidt, 1937, J. Chem. Soc. 