2188.PDF
AN UPDATE ON THE NASA PLANETARY SCIENCE DIVISION RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS PROGRAM .C. R. Richey1 and M. Bernstein2 and J. Rall2 1NASA Headquarters, Planetary Science Division, Smart Data Solutions, LLC, Mail Code 3C79, Washington, DC, 20062, USA (christina.r.richey@nasa.gov), 2Nasa Headquarters.   Introduction:  NASA’s Planetary Science Division (PSD) solicits its research and analysis (R&A) programs each year in Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Sciences (ROSES).  Beginning with the 2014 ROSES solicitation, PSD will be changing the structure of the program elements under which the majority of planetary science R&A is done.  Major changes include the creation of five core research program elements aligned with PSD’s strategic science questions, the introduction of several new R&A opportunities, new submission requirements, and a new timeline for proposal submission.  These changes will be addressed in a town hall presented by NASA PSD. In conjunction with the town hall, we will first give an introduction of ROSES and NSPIRES to our younger scientists, as well as a detailed explanation of the review process and the Service and Advice for Research and Analysis (SARA) website.  This will be followed by a presentation of the history of the PSD R&A program, through the selections made under ROSES 2013.   We will also present information on some of the changes being made to the 2014 ROSES solicitations in PSD, including submission requirements and timeline for calls.  Finally, we will provide expanded information needed by those who with to propose to the earliest program elements in the ROSES 2014 schedule, with initial deadlines shortly after LPSC.   ROSES and NSPIRES: Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Sciences (ROSES) contains the research announcements for all for the entire Science Mission Directorate (SMD), including the Planetary Science Division.  Submission of ROSES proposals is done electronically via NSPIRES: http://nspires.nasaprs.com.  NSPIRES contains all the information with regards to each ROSES call, including solicitation deadlines, information of specific programs, and help desk information for the submission process.  We will present further details on the proposal submission process to help guide younger scientists.  For a historical perspective, statistical trends, including the average award size within the PSD programs, selections rates, and lessons learned, will be presented. Review Process and Volunteering: The SARA website (http://sara.nasa.gov) contains information on all ROSES solicitations, including lists of the solicitations, points of contact (Program Officers) for each solicitation, selection statistics, an RSS feed for amendments to ROSES, and a mailing list for ‘Letters from SARA.’  There is an email address (SARA@nasa.gov) for inquiries and an area for volunteer reviewers to sign up.  Additionally, the Planetary Science Division Corner contains PSD-specific information and presentations.  The peer review process is based on Scientific/Technical Merit, Relevance, and Level of Effort, and will be detailed within this presentation. ROSES 2014 submission changes:  To facilitate the early recruitment of a conflict-free review panel, given the nature of the new calls, and to ensure proposals are submitted to the appropriate program, all programs will use a two-step proposal submission process.  A Step-1 proposal is required and must be submitted electronically by the Step-1 due date. The Step1 proposal should include a description of the science goals and objectives to be addressed by the proposal, a brief description of the methodology to be used to address the science goals and objectives, and the relevance of the proposed research to the call submitted to. Introduction: Exoplanets:  The Exoplanets Research program solicits basic research proposals to advance our knowledge and understanding of exoplanetary systems. This program is shared between the Planetary Science Division and the Astrophysics Division. Its objectives are the detection and characterization of planets and planetary systems outside of our Solar System, including the determination of their compositions, dynamics, energetics, and chemical behaviors. Research supported by this calls may include observational work, theoretical studies, and modeling work. (Appendix E.3) Introduction: Emerging Worlds:  Research in the area of Emerging Worlds aims to understand the formation and early evolution of the Solar System, as well as planetary systems in general. The central goal of the program element is to understand how planets, satellites, and minor bodies (including small bodies and rings) form and evolve. NASA is particularly interested in proposals for research projects that closely support its mission for exploring the Solar System, contribute to the development of future missions, or involve major interdisciplinary efforts to solve key questions. A wide range of investigations will be covered, including theoretical studies, analytical and numerical 2188.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
modeling, sample-based studies of extraterrestrial materials, laboratory studies, data synthesis, and observational studies of objects outside of our solar system relevant to the formation of planetary systems. (Appendix C.2) Additional Information:  Additional details will be provided on the Cassini Data Analysis Program (CDAPS) and the previous Origins of Solar System Program (SSO, Planetary Science Division) selections, as well as the new Exoplanets Research program, for which Dr. Richey is the Program Officer.  Additionally, both Dr. Richey and Dr. Jeff Grossman will be on hand to provide additional information as needed for the Emerging Worlds call, for which they are both Points of Contact. 2188.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
