 Dynamical evolution of the Earth-Moon Progenitors.   B.  Quarles1 and J.  J.  Lissauer1, 1NASA Ames Research Center, Space Science and Astrobiology Division, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000 (billy.l.quarles@nasa.gov) The origin of Earth's Moon has been a perplexing mystery for many decades.  Lunar samples have been obtained indicating an age of the Moon to be roughly 60-120 Myr [1,2] younger than the Calcium Aluminum Inclusions in the chondritic meteorites.  Updated measurements  indicate  an  age  difference  of  70-110  Myr [3,4].  Additional information has been obtained for the composition of  the  Moon relative  to  the Earth,  with surprising similarities and differences.   However,  the complete story of the formation of the Moon has yet to be told. Simulations of a Moon-forming giant impact using smooth particle hydrodynamics have been successful in providing  insight  into  what  initial  conditions  are  required  with  respect  to  the  collision  parameters  and compositions  [5].   But  the  mass  of  the  impactor  is largely unconstrained and can vary depending on the chosen model [6,7].   Using a dynamical  5 terrestrial planet model we present results  that constrain some of this uncertainty and indicate a likely spatial origin of the proto-Moon if a mass ratio of 4:1 or 1:1 is assumed between the progenitors. Method We have developed  a  custom dynamical  model  (an  improved version of [8]) in which the orbital parameters  are  determined  seconds  before  a  collision. We investigate a parameter space of initial semimajor axes and eccentricities of the proto-Moon.  The initial conditions of the proto-Earth are determined through conservation  of  angular  momentum with  the  current Earth-Moon system.  All other orbital parameters for the other terrestrial and giant planets are taken from a recent common ephemeris.  Mass ratios of 8:1, 4:1, and 1:1 are  considered  within a range of semimajor  axis (0.76 - 1.55 AU) and eccentricity (0.0 - 0.1). This model assumes a Solar System architecture of giant planets, however this may not have been the case for  the era  in question.  Thus we investigate a Nice model [9] configuration for the 4:1 mass ratio to determine the possible consequences of the Nice model on early giant impacts. Our simulations begin at a time where most material  has  been  cleared  from  the  early  Solar  System  (~30 Myr  after  CAIs)  and we evolve the system for 200 Myr  or until a planet-planet collision occurs for each chosen initial condition.  Completely inelastic collisions are  assumed.   We characterize  each  outcome based  upon  the  collision  time  and  resultant  merged mass.  A category of success describes a collision that occurs after  8 Myr and the colliding bodies  are the  proto-Moon and proto-Earth.  A pseudo-success occurs after 8 Myr with a collision that produces an Earth-like mass but the colliding bodies are not the proto-Earth and proto-Moon.  A collision after 8 Myr that doesn't produce  an  Earth-like  mass  is  denoted  as  a  non-SS mass.  If the collision occurs before 8 Myr, the simulation is characterized by the  early category and is not discriminant  to  the  resultant  merged  mass.   Cases where no collisions occur (stable) or a terrestrial body is  ejected  from the  system are  denoted  as  NC and  ejection, respectively. Results We present  the results  of  a  high resolution set  of  simulations considering the 4:1  mass ratio  within a  Solar System like giant planet architecture (Figure 1). A total  of  8110 initial  conditions are  considered  to  fully  explore  the  parameter  space  which  illustrates many interesting features.  Figure  1: Evaluation of coplanar initial conditions for the  Earth-Moon  progenitors.   The  initial  semimajor axis of the proto-Moon (S) and the proto-Earth (L) are indicated.  Local  regions  of  success are  evident  in  semimajor axis ranges of 0.80  - 1.00 AU and 1.08 - 1.30  AU where these regions have potentially different  causes for success.  The interior region is dominated by interactions  between  the  proto-Moon  and  its  terrestrial neighbors.   The proto-Moon in the exterior region is influenced by interactions with its terrestrial neighbors and Jupiter.  This is shown with a comparison of this map with the Nice model (Figure 2). From  comparison  of  these  figures  the  interior  (< 1 AU) region is almost identical while a more significant difference is seen at 1.165 AU.  In this region there is a strip of  success  outcomes in the case of the Solar System that are induced by resonant interactions between the proto-Moon, proto-Earth, and Jupiter.  At this location we have identified a possible mean motion resonance  along  with  a  secular  perturbation  from Jupiter that could affect the long term stability of the proto-Moon. Much weaker features occur between 1.0 and 1.165 AU due to mean motion resonances in both the Solar System and Nice model architectures.  Even though the 1.165  AU feature  is  not  present  in  the Nice  model  simulations,  both  models  demonstrate  that  the  outcomes in the success and the pseudo-success categories are not uncommon.  Overall there were slightly  fewer collisions in the Nice model simulations where this is attributed  different  secular  perturbations  due  to  the  assumption  of  nearly  circular  orbits  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  In the model of the present Solar System, these eccentricities are approximately 0.05 leading to larger perturbations affecting the proto-Moon in the exterior (> 1 AU) region. Discussion Consideration  of  different  initial  conditions  of  a  5  terrestrial planet model have produced a wide variety of possible outcomes.  However, not all these outcomes are equally probable.  Due to the dominant gravitational interactions,  some outcomes have a higher density localized within the parameter space.  This is important in  interpreting  the  likelihood  of  possible  outcomes. Additionally,  we have uncovered an interesting set of dynamics that would have occurred among the terrestrial  planets through mean motion resonances.   Most importantly, we provide estimates of the likely formation region of the proto-Moon. Acknowledgements This work has been supported by the NASA Postdoctoral Program. References [1]  Hartmann, W. K.  and  Davis,  D.  R.,.  Icarus  24,  504-514  Apr. 1975. [2] Cameron, A. G. W. and Ward, W. R., LPSC VII, 120-121 Mar. 1976. [3] Brandon, A., Nature 450, 1169-1170 Dec. 2007. [4] Borg, L. E., Connelly, J. N., Boyet, M., and Carlson,  R. W., Nature 477, 70-72 Sep. 2011. [5] Cameron, A. G. W., LPSC XXXI, 133-144, Mar. 2000. [6]  Canup, R. M., Science 338, 1052,  Nov. 2012 [7]  Cuk, M. and Stewart, S. T., Science 338, 1047,  Nov. 2012 [8]  Rivera, E. J., Ph.D. thesis, State University of New York at Stony Brook, 2002 [9]  Morbidelli, A., Tsiganis, K., Crida, A., Levison, and H. F., Gomes, R., AJ 134, 1790-1798,  Nov. 2007 Figure  2:  Same  terrestrial  planet  initial  conditions  considering a 4:1 mass ratio except with a Nice model configuration of giant planets. 