2220.PDF
RADIOMETRIC DETERMINATION OF THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF COMPLEX PARTICULATE MATERIALS UNDER MARS-LIKE CONDITIONS  Andrew J. Ryan1, Sylvain Piqueux2, and Philip R. Christensen1, 1School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA   Introduction:  The temperature of the martian surface is a function of the physical and compositional characteristics of the upper layers of material, which are in turn the result of past geologic activity. Volatile transport and stability also depend strongly on the insulating properties of the surface. Temperature measurements of the Mars surface have been obtained  by several orbital (e.g. ITRM, TES, THEMIS) and roverbased instruments (e.g. min-TES, REMS) to elucidate the geologic history and context for habitability on a variety of different scales and in a number of settings.  Thermal inertia is a parameter that combines the thermophysical properties pertinent to modeling the transfer of heat at a planetary surface (conductivity, specific heat, density). Thermal inertia is determined from temperature measurements using a number of well-established planetary regolith heat flow numerical models [1,2]. For most geologic materials, including particulates, specific heat and density vary by a factor of ~2-4 and are sufficiently well known [1]. However, the thermal conductivity of particulate materials at Mars pressure may vary by several orders of magnitude and is affected by many factors, including gain size and roughness, regolith porosity, the presence of cement between grains, and grain mixtures. The complexity of interpreting thermal conductivity (and thus thermal inertia) values necessitates laboratory measurements.  Line heat probes were used in previous [3,4,5] and concurrent studies [6] to characterize the thermal properties of grains under martian pressure conditions: the effect of grain size and packing (bulk density) is well characterized for particles up to ~1 mm in diameter [3,4,5,6]; grain size mixtures have been measured in a few preliminary studies. The line-heat source method however cannot be used to measure complex geologic samples similar to those observed on planetary surfaces (layered,  cemented, coarse-grained, etc.) due to small sample size requirements and problems associated with using heating or measuring probes in coarse or cemented samples. Nor does it allow the determination of a temperature-dependent conductivity across the martian temperature range. Here, we forgo the use of probes for a new radiometric measurement technique, described below.  Methods:  We use a radiative technique for determining the thermal conductivity of coarse and complex samples under Mars pressure, gas,  and temperature conditions. Large-volume samples (~4e-3 m3) in a cylindrical holder within a Mars environment chamber (Fig. 1) are cooled at the base and sides from room temperature to 77 K (LN2). A FLIR A40 infrared camera (7.3 – 13 μm) observes the temperature change at the sample surface as it cools, without the use of thermocouples or heat sources (Fig. 2). Sample surface cooling trends are fit with a finite element model of heat transfer (COMSOL Multiphysics®) to retrieve the thermal conductivity as a function of material temperature (Fig. 3).  The environmental chamber may be held at a fixed pressure, ranging from atmospheric pressure (101,325 Pa, 760 torr) down to ~1e-3 Pa (~1e-5 torr), for the duration of the experiment, allowing for thermal conductivity studies at a variety of planetary surface pressures (Earth to ~airless).   Figure 1. A look-down view of the sample holder (22 cm diameter) filled with a crushed basalt, within the planetary surface environment chamber. A blackbody plate and gold plate reflector are on either side of the sample holder.  The blackbody contains an embedded Platinum Resistance Thermometer (PRT) and is used to calibrate the infrared camera that views the scene from above through a window. The gold plate is a lambertian reflector (emissivity ~0.02). The downwelling thermal radiance on the gold plate, which is nearly perfectly reflected, is accounted for when measuring the temperature of the sample and modeling its thermal state. The rainbow wire is connected to 5 PRTs that are fixed to the inner walls of the sample holder so that the boundary temperature of the sample is known and may be included in the finite element model.    2220.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 2. Infrared color-stretched image of the sample from Fig. 1 during a measurement run. A stack of 8 images is averaged to reduce noise. The blackbody calibration target square is to the left of the sample and the gold plate reflector is to the right. The sample surface is coolest near the edges due to conductive cooling through the aluminum walls of the sample holder via a liquid nitrogen Dewar system within the sample holder base. These images are acquired every ~3 minutes through the duration of the run, along with coinciding measurements of sample holder wall kinetic temperature, blackbody calibration target kinetic temperature, environmental chamber pressure, and time.   Figure 3. Colorized image of finite element model for a sample within the laboratory environmental chamber (COMSOL Multiphysics® – Heat Transfer Module). Boundary conditions on all sides of sample are known from laboratory measurement: temperatures at the base and walls are interpolated from PRTs on sample holder inner walls; downwelling radiance on sample surface is estimated using gold plate reflector. Values for thermal conductivity (T dependent) are adjusted to achieve a match between model and laboratory surface temperature.  Initial results and planned work: Measurements have been conducted using homogenous spherical beads identical to those used by [3]. Initial results are in good agreement with their measurements and confirm independent numerical modeling efforts that predict that the thermal inertia of particulate material under Mars conditions is temperature-dependent [7].  Mixtures: Grain mixtures have been observed on the martian surface in many locations. Initial laboratory studies have indicated that the thermal inertia of a mixture is most similar to that of the largest grain size [4,6]. This could lead to overestimates of particle sizes derived from orbital datasets if this effect is not better understood. Homogenous 2- and 3-size fraction mixtures will be measured at Mars pressure to better characterize the effects of grain mixtures. Our apparatus will be particularly useful for measuring coarse-grained (>~1 mm particle diameter) mixtures.  Cemented and layered samples: Numerical modeling has indicated that even a small amount of cementation can cause a significant increase in thermal inertia and conductivity in soils [8]. Independent laboratory measurements on a single salt-encrusted sample support this prediction [5]. Layers of cemented grains, such as duricrust, may be common on Mars, as indicated by surface observations [e.g. 9] and global thermal inertia [10]. The processes leading to the formation of these cemented soils may reveal fundamental clues about the nature of the interaction between the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, and the geosphere. It is thus critical that the thermal effects of cementation and layering be characterized so that such soils may be understood and mapped on Mars.  To measure the conductivity of cemented samples in a controlled manner, spherical beads are cleaned and then rinsed in a salt-bearing solution to precipitate prescribed amounts of inter-grain salt cement. This salt precipitation process occurs in the sample holder so that once the sample is prepared, it need not be disturbed by transport or the insertion of probes/sensors.  References: [1] Mellon M. T. et al. (2008) The Martian Surface, ch. 18, ed. J. Bell. [2] Kieffer H. H. (2013) JGR, 118, 1-20. [3] Presley M. A. and Christensen P. R. (1997) JGR, 102, 6551-6566. [4] Presley M. A. and Craddock R. A. (2006) JGR, 111, E09013. [5] Presley M. A. et al. (2009) JGR, 114, E11007. [6] Mellon M. T. and McKay C. P. (2013) LPSC XLIV, Abstract #2864. [7] Piqueux S. and Christensen P. R. (2009) JGR, 114, E09005. [8] Piqueux S. and Christensen P. R. (2009) JGR, 114, E09006. [9] Herkenhoff et al. (2004) Science, 305, 824-826. [10] Jakosky B. M. and Christensen P. R. (1986) JGR, 91, 3547-3559.  Support: This work is supported by NASA MFRP Grant NNX11AF56G.  2220.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
