 PRECISION CONTROL OF AUTONOMOUS SPACECRAFT DURING CLOSE-PROXIMITY NEO OPERATIONS USING CLASSICAL CONTROL METHODOLOGIES.  M. Zimmer1, K. Williams1, J. Johnson2, C. Church1, R. Fevig1 and W. Semke2, 1Department of Space Studies, University of North Dakota, 4149 University Avenue Stop 9008, Grand Forks, ND 58202. 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of North Dakota, 243 Centennial Drive Stop 8359, Grand Forks, ND 58202. Scope: The purpose of this project is to develop  an  autonomous,  robust  mission  design  and  controller  to  enhance  spacecraft  performance  in  closeproximity NEO operations while safely satisfying predetermined mission requirements. Introduction: Near-Earth  Objects  (NEOs) present both an opportunity and a real threat to civilization.  Scientific  investigations  of  NEOs  inform  our knowledge of the origin of our solar system. Resources available in NEOs provide a potential economic return on Earth and in-situ utilization of such resources can benefit  future  space  endeavors.  In  addition  to  these benefits, NEOs also pose a threat to civilization. The 15  February,  2013  Chelyabinsk  meteor  incident  reminded the public of the dangers of impacting NEOs. In order  to properly analyze,  mine, relocate, or mitigate the threat posed by a NEO, spacecraft will need to operate properly in the close-proximity NEO environment.  NEO close-proximity operations pose a challenging spacecraft navigation problem due to their tenuous, complex gravitational field, and other perturbing  forces  (i.e.,  solar-radiation  pressure  (SRP)  and third-body perturbations)  [1].  As  a  result,  there  is  a need to implement a control algorithm to our spacecraft in order  to properly fulfill  our  mission requirements. Additionally,  there  is  a  need  for  autonomy with the spacecraft control methodology due to the delay times in communication between the spacecraft and mission control. The  Japanese  Aerospace  Exploration Agency's  recent Hayabusa mission to  asteroid 25143 Itokawa accurately demonstrated the navigational challenges  that  arise  during  autonomous  satellite  operations. Most notable were the anomalies that arose during  the  sample  recovery  touchdowns  during  the Hayabusa mission  [5]. With the information received from the Hayabusa mission, we may test  our control theory in a simulated, "real-world" environment. NEO Environment: To generate the Itokawa environment we utilized AGI's System Tool Kit (STK) software.  Two gravity models are  being used  in  this study: a point-mass model and a degree and order 4, spherical harmonic gravity model found in [3]. Using both models allows for the testing of sensitivity of the satellite to each perturbing factor independently as well as collectively.  Our STK simulations have found that there  are  three  regions  of  influence  around Itokawa. For a spacecraft's orbit to be gravitationally bound to the asteroid, it must be within the Hill radius. The Hill radius of Itokawa varies from 25km to 45km depending on Itokawa-Sun geometry [3].  Within this radius, simulations revealed that a satellite in a circular orbit about Itokawa with semi-major axis of 3km or greater was ejected from the system before completing one orbit due to the influence of SRP and third-body perturbations. It  was found that orbits below 1km in semimajor axis were more susceptible to the complex gravity of a rotating, non-uniform body with the spacecraft either impacting or being ejected after only a few orbits. Spherical harmonic gravity models are only valid outside  a  circumscribing  sphere  around  the  asteroid. Once the spacecraft's orbit penetrates this sphere, the gravity model breaks down [2]. Therefore we chose not to run simulations with a semi-major axis within this sphere.  For our STK simulation of Itokawa, this was the surrounding sphere of radius 277.9m [3]. Figure 1- The influence of both SRP (squares) and point-mass gravity (diamonds) that a 500kg spacecraft is exposed to around Itokawa at semi-major axis 5km is shown. Depending on where Itokawa is within its orbit  affects the forces  imposed on the spacecraft (true anomaly of orbit). As the spacecraft moves to a higher  altitude,  gravitational  attraction  decreases  and SRP becomes more  prevalent.  Moving closer  causes SRP to slowly become less of a perturbing force. Analysis also revealed areas of natural stability.  This stability was found when the spacecraft  was placed  in  a  circular  orbit  with  semi-major  axis  11.5km. This is in agreement with Scheeres [3]. Orbit stability increased again as the spacecraft were placed in polar and retrograde orbits. Using information about 040 80 120 160 200 240 280 320 360 0.00000 0.00002 0.00004 0.00006 0.00008 True Anamoly of Asteroid Orbit (Degrees) Fo rc e (N ew to ns ) the close-proximity NEO environment and basic orbital mechanics  allows for  the  mission planners  to  utilize these regions of natural stability to better control the satellite while it performs its mission. Spacecraft  Orbit  Control: With  the  NEO environment well-characterized in our STK simulation, a classical control method can be implemented to tests its reliability for close-proximity NEO operations. The classical  control  scheme  implemented  is  the  wellknown  Proportional,  Integral  and  Derivative  (PID) controller [4]. The controller uses an error function to determine when input is needed.  Proportional, Integral and  Derivative  terms  define  the  function  used.  PID control can be cost-effective and be easily tuned based on the performance specifications. PID control is well understood for linear systems. First the error from the desired orbit is determined and used in a feedback control loop. The orbit is divided  into  finite  time steps  and  the  difference  between the desired position and current position is determined.  This  difference  in  position  (altitude  for  our study) is the error used by the PID controller. STK was merged with Matlab to accomplish this task. This allows for  customized  control  algorithms to  be  developed and simulated within the STK simulation. Figure 2- High-level overview of the program written to test or control schematic for our spacecraft. The study found that the PID controller alone demonstrated some limitations for  optimal orbit  control. The controller constantly tries to correct for an error  value  based  solely  on  its  instantaneous  position without regard to future behavior.  The initial  control tests were conducted in an environment in which the primary body (Itokawa) was treated as a point mass in order to tune the control system. In  initial  simulations it  was found that  spacecraft thruster levels were very low  (mN).  The levels kept the spacecraft in the desired orbit, but resulted in large transfer times. Another method tested was to break the maneuver into two sections; the transfer and stabilization. Though promising initially, when SRP was introduced into the system the thrust output from the previously tuned PID controller did not keep the satellite in a stable orbit. The SRP influence is sufficiently large to render the previous method ineffective. The sensitivity is not ideal for missions to new asteroids with unknown gravitational fields and changing environments leaving the autonomous PID control algorithm working in vain. Figure  3-  Top:  Transfer  orbit  from 3km to 5km  using  an  autonomous  PID  controller.  Bottom: Same controller settings, however the spacecraft is now under the influence of SRP. SRP overpowers the systems and the spacecraft ejects. Results: We have shown that the classic PID controller is not a robust control theory to implement in our close-proximity NEO operations due to large perturbation in the relatively weak gravitational  field.  If orbital  mechanics  and  advanced  control  theory  are merged  together  to  create  a  smart  controller  there  is promise that it will be an effective tool for close-proximity autonomous NEO operations. Refereneces: [1]   Church  C.  and  Fevig  R. (2013)  LPS  XLIV, Abstract  #2999.  [2] Scheeres  D.J. (2012) Orbital Motion in Strongly Perturbed Environments,  Praxis.  [3]  Scheeres D.J.  et al.,  (2006)  AIAA, 2006-6661. [4] Visioli A. (2006)  Practical PID Control,  Springer. [5] Yano H. et al. (2006) Science,  312, 1350-1353. 