2251.PDF
DISTINGUISHING HISINGERITE FROM OTHER CLAYS AND ITS IMPORTANCE FOR MARS.  R. E. Milliken1 and D. L. Bsh2, 1Dept. Geological Sciences, Brown University, Box 1846, Providence, RI 02912 Ralph_Milliken@brown.edu; 2Dept. Geological Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405.  Background:  Orbital visible-near infrared (VISNIR) spectrometers have detected numerous occurrences of surface deposits and exposed strata on Mars exhibiting absorptions consistent with the presence of clay minerals [1-5]. In the majority of cases the observed absorptions are indicative of Fe and/or Mg-rich clays such as saponite, nontronite, chlorite, serpentine, or mixed-layer smectite/chlorite [1-5]. Specifically, these identifications rely on M-OH absorptions in the 2-2.5 µm wavelength region, often in conjunction with H2O features at 1.9 µm in the case of reported smectites. Though significantly weaker, diagnostic absorptions near ~1.4 µm due to OH and/or H2O are also observed in spectra for some deposits. In addition to their indication of aqueous processes, the detection of clay minerals on Mars is of great significance because their fine-grained nature can promote trapping and binding of organic matter and the layered structure and swelling capacity of smectites may have made them important in the evolution of complex organic compounds [e.g., 6]. Indeed, the presence of clay minerals was a significant factor in landing site selection for the Curiosity rover, and similar considerations will likely arise for the Mars 2020 rover.  The presence of clay minerals on Mars was definitively confirmed by in situ X-ray diffraction patterns acquired by the CheMin instrument on the Curiosity rover in Yellowknife Bay [7]. These data showed evidence for Fe-saponite (smectite) in ancient martian mudstones, but another significant component of the samples was XRD-amorphous. Similarly, XRD patterns of soil scooped from the modern Rocknest sand shadow also indicated a significant amorphous component. Though not definitive, this component may include a contribution from hisingerite [8]. The potential for both smectite and hisingerite to be present on Mars in materials of vastly different age is worthy of additional study given their different formation conditions and implications for current water storage and cycling. The definition and identification of hisingerite has a complicated history, with many studies suggesting it is noncrystalline, a precursor to nontronite, or a nontronite-like clay [9-11]. However, detailed characterization by [11] showed conclusively that hisingerite is not similar to nontronite (a 10Å 2:1 structure) and is instead a hydrated, ferric, kaolin mineral (a 7Å 1:1 structure) with a curved morphology. Thus it may be considered the Fe equivalent of halloysite. The goal of this study was to charcterize the XRD and VIS-NIR reflectance properties of hisingerites and how they compare to Fe-smectites. We discuss the importance and feasibility of distinguishing these phases on Mars from orbital data and address the implications for the presence of hisingerite on Mars.  Methods: To date we have acquired and analyzed 10 samples purported to be hisingerite from a wide range of localities (North America, Europe, South America, Australia). Five samples were provided by T. Eggleton from his detailed study [11] and have been previously measured using a variety of techniques, including XRD. Two of these samples are 'type examples', though it is unclear if they are the same samples originally analyzed by Hisinger [11]. Additional samples were acquired through mineral dealers (3), from the Caltech mineral collection (1), and from the Indiana University mineral collection (1). All samples were powdered, dry sieved to <45 µm, and measured under ambient lab conditions.  XRD patterns were acquired at IU on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Reflectance spectra were acquired in RELAB at Brown University from 0.3 - 25 µm using a combination of a custom bi-directional spectrometer (0.3-2.6 µm) and an FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Nicolet iS50) with a diffuse reflectance attachment. Spectra were processed by fitting a continuum slope over the wavelength region of interest using an upper convex hull fit and dividing each spectrum by its corresponding continuum. Results: Our XRD data of the 5 samples previously studied and provided by T. Eggleton confirm those earlier results. The hisingerite samples from Gillinge and Riddarhytten are type examples and are quite pure; these samples should be used as the basis for comparision to determine if other samples contain true hisingerite. The sample from the IU collection (origin Mexico) exhibits an XRD pattern that is nearly identical to these type examples and is also quite pure (Figure 1, red). Though not sharp, peaks in hisingerite XRD patterns are clearly distinct and can be relied upon for accurate identification if several can be identified in a sample.  Figure 1. XRD patterns for type examples of hisignerite (black: Gillinge; blue: Riddarhytten) and an additional 'clean' sample (red: Mexico sample from IU collection). Sharp peaks are due to minor impurities. 2251.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Of the remaining samples, some contain hisingerite but none are as pure as the type examples. For socalled 'hisingerites', XRD patterns reveal that many contain smectite, chlorite, mixed-layer chlorite/smectite or other non-clay phases. As noted by [11], the occurrence of Fe-clays such as nontronite mixed with hisingerite is a likely reason for earlier reports of hisingerite having nontronite-like qualities.  Though hisingerite and impurities can be readily discriminated in XRD patterns, unambiguous identification of hisingerite in such mixtures is difficult using VIS-NIR spectroscopy. As shown in Figure 2, the type examples of hisingerite have strong H2O features at 1.4 and 1.9 µm with weaker Fe-OH features at 2.28 µm and longward. The center position of the primary FeOH vibration at 2.28 µm is identical to that of Fesmectites (e.g., nontronite). Therefore, analysis based solely on band position would suggest that hisingerite and nontronite cannot be distinguished at VIS-NIR wavelengths. However, the Fe-OH band at 2.28 µm is distinctly broader than observed for smectites (Figure 2), and this greater width seems to be a defining spectral characteristic of hisingerite. Reflectance spectra of other (impure) samples that contain hisingerite are more ambiguous and could be confused as mixtures of other clay minerals or clay/non-clay mixtures; identification of hisingerite in some of these samples (whose presence is verified by XRD) is problematic. However, the samples from California, Sweden, Saxony, and Quebec all contain smectite or chlorite/smectite (from XRD) and exhibit reflectance properties expected for these phases. In summary, relatively pure hisingerite can be distinguished from nontronite and other Fe-rich clays, but hisingerite that is subordinate to other clay minerals in an assemblage would be difficult to identify at CRISM and OMEGA wavelengths.  Conclusions:  Our results show that the similarity in reflectance properties between hisingerite and nontronite could easily lead to their misidentification on Mars. Center positions of absorption bands are insufficent for discrimination and care must be used to examine the width of the primary Fe-OH absorption at ~2.28 µm. In this context, the signal to noise, spectral resolution, and spectral sampling for any given spectrum must be taken into account for accurate identification. These issues are likely not problematic for highresolution lab instruments but may be a concern for orbital OMEGA and CRISM data. In some cases (e.g., few pixels) data may be insufficient to differentiate between hisingerite and nontronite. Hisingerite has distinct peaks in XRD patterns that should be identifiable in CheMin data on Curiosity if it is present in sufficient amounts. Hisingerite can form by weathering, deuteric alteration, or hydrothermal alteration of mafic materials, and for these reasons its existence on Mars has been previously proposed [12]. It has physical properties that are quite distinct from smectites, including a vitreous luster and greater hardness. In addition, the hydration behavior of hisingerite  is distinct from smectites in that it does not hold H2O in interlayer regions, but instead has a curved or spherical morphology and likely traps water in the spheres [11].  Little work has been done on the dehydration/rehydration properties of hisingerite, and it is unclear if it would exhibit irreversible dehydration as does halloysite. This is in contrast to the rehydration behavior of smectites, and limited rehydration would have important implications for atmospheric exchange if hisingerite is present in Martian soils. Hisingerite on Mars could also indicate low degrees of water-rock interaction, and previous work indicates that it may mature or alter to Fe-saponite under elevated temperatures [10]. Ongoing work is focused on analyzing reported CRISM detections of 'Fe-smectite' in detail to determine if some may in fact be more consistent with hisingerite.  References: [1] Poulet et al. (2005), Science, 438, 623-627; [2] Mustard et al (2008), Science, 454, 305-309; [3] Ehlmann et al. (2011), Nature, 479, 53-60; [4] Carter et al. (2013), JGR, 118, 831-858; [5] Milliken and Bish (2011) LPSC 42, #2230; [6] Cairns-Smith & Hartman (1986), Cambridge Univ. Press, 208 pp.; [7] Vaniman et al. (2013), Science, doi: 10.1126/science.1243480; [8] Bish et al. (2013), Science, 341, doi: 10.1126/science.1238932; [9] Whelan & Goldich (1961), Am. Min, 46, 1412-1423; [10] Shayan et al. (1988), Clay Clay Min., 36, 327-336; [11] Eggleton & Tilley (1998), Clay Clay Min., 46, 400-413; [12] Burns,R. (1986), LPSC 17, 93-94.   Figure 2. VIS-NIR reflectance spectra of 'hisingerite' samples (and notronite for comparison). Sm=smectite, mixlayer=chlorite/smectite, his=hisingerite, serp=serpentine. 2251.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
