2266.PDF
VENUS: NEW MAPS OF MULTIPLE PARAMETERS OF METER-SCALE ROUGHNESS N. V. Bondarenko1,2 and M. A. Kreslavsky1, 1Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California - Santa Cruz, 1156 High, Santa Cruz, CA, 95064, USA, mkreslav@ucsc.edu;  2IRE, NAS of Ukraine, Kharkov, 61085, Ukraine.  Introduction: The lack of new data about the surface of Venus pushes researches toward extracting new information from old data sets. Radar echo profiles recorded with the Magellan radar system in the radar altimeter (RA) mode were used to extract the range to the surface (=> elevation), and estimate normal reflectivity and a roughness parameter [1]. Recently, we showed [2] that the echo profiles contain more information about scattering properties of the surface than covered by these two parameters. Here we present our tentative results of global mapping of several roughness parameters from RA echo profiles. Data processing:  The RA echo profile (the received power as a function of time) is controlled by the range to the surface and the shape of the surface backscattering function (the specific backscattering crosssection as a function of the incidence angle), which, in turn, is controlled by surface roughness at scales from decimeters to decameters. Theoretically, the backscattering function derived from the echo profiles [3] should be used to study roughness. Practically, the attempts to map advanced roughness parameters resulted in products of poor visual quality due to some peculiarities of the inversion procedure [3]. Seeking to produce 8 pix. per degree visually sharp maps, we use the raw echo profiles to map roughness. The strongest dependence of the echo on the range is the (range)-4 coefficient in the radar equation. We get rid of it by normalizing each 9.87 µs long echo profile  by its total power. Conversion of the delay to the incidence angle also depends on the range. To minimize this effect we considered only the 1st cycle data and only parts of the orbits close to the periapsis. The latter limited our maps to 24ºS - 44ºN latitude zone (Fig. 1).  On the basis of our statistical analysis of the normalized echoes for the plains (to be published elsewhere), we choose the following set of tree parameters. (1) We consider the first 1.05 µs of the echo as the main peak produced by reflection off a flat surface. The total power R of the rest 8.82 µs of the echo is a general measure of roughness. We use R as a green channel in the color composite map (Fig. 2). (2) We consider the first 2.10 µs after the peak as a peak shoulder. Its total power 1/F is shown in Fig. 3, darker shades denote higher F. F characterizes the sharpness of echo peak. We consider F as a parameter of "flatness". For example, a slightly undulating plain and a perfectly flat plain with a few scattered boulders can have the same R, but the latter has higher F, it is "flatter". We use F for red channel in Fig. 2. (3) We consider the last 3.36 µs of the echo as the echo tail. Its power T characterizes shorter-scale roughness and is used as a blue channel in Fig. 2.  Analysis:  For rough areas all three parameters correlate well with each other, and the color composite map (Fig. 2) is mostly grayish; brighter shades meaning rougher surface. The plains (darker parts of the map show more variations (because the choice of parameters was optimized for this). Red patches mean "flat" plains, while dark shades are smooth, but not "flat". For example, in Bell Regio two equally smooth areas (marked with P) have very contrasting flatness. This region is mottled with wind streaks and similar features. Flatness variations here are probably caused by surficial deposits associated with crater Mead. Not surprisingly, the smoothest areas are also very flat. One of them coincide with the distinctive radardark lava flow in Bereghinya Planitia (B) shown in [4]. Several smoothest flat areas are associated with radardark diffuse features, e.g., G near crater Boleyn or V in Viriplaca Planum. The flat area in the south-western part of Heng-o Corona (H) looks pinkish in comparison to the flattest areas mentioned above. Here T is quite high indicating the presence of small-scale roughness features. This is consistent with that this place is rather bright in the radar mosaics. Due to high visual sharpness of the map it is seen that a number of splotches have smooth central parts, like the example in Undine Planitia (U) Circular area of slightly anomalous roughness in Akhtamar Planitia (A) does not correlate with boundaries of geological units; radar images show a large diffuse splotch in its center. These point to exogenic origin of this anomaly (atmospheric impact blast?), but particular mechanism of flattening is unclear. Conclusions:  Considered examples illustrate the potential use of the new maps for geomorphological analysis and understanding of surface processes. We continue working on improvement of the maps and on their analysis.  References: [1] Ford P. G. and Pettengill G. H. (1992) JGR, 97, 13103 - 13114. [2] Bondarenko N. V. and Kreslavsky M. A. (2013) LPSC 44, # 1648. [3] Tyler G. L. et al. (1992) JGR, 97, 13,115- 13,139. [4] Bondarenko N. V et al. (2010) GRL, 37, doi: 10.1029/2010GL045233.  2266.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 44°N 24°S 0°E 180°E 360°E Fig. 3 B A U U H Fig. 2 Fig. 1 V G P 2266.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
