2305.PDF
ELECTRON MICROPROBE CONFIRMATION OF CHEMCAM LIBS ANALYSES: THIN SECTIONS FROM A MARS ANALOGUE SITE.  Z. E. Gallegos1, H. E. Newsom1, A. M. Ollila1,  N. L. Lanza2, R. C. Wiens2, S. M. Clegg2, R. E. McInroy2, G. R. Osinski3, P. Lee4,5, 1Institute of Meteoritics, Univ. of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, U.S.A. (zachegallegos@gmail.com), 2Los Alamos National Laboratory, NM, U.S.A.,  3Univ. of Western Ontario, Canada,  4Mars Institute, 5NASA Ames Research Center, CA, U.S.A.  Figure 1. A panoramic view of the field site within the Haughton impact structure. Distance to the ~ 3m tall ridge in the foreground is ~ 4m. Samples were gathered from two areas: the center of the image where the iron oxide hydrothermal alteration is observed and around the left side of the ridge where the rocks are unaltered. (The red outline indicates the area in Figure 2) Introduction:  A Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover simulation was conducted in the spring of 2011, to 1) produce a challenging simulation for MSL scientists using reconnaissance tools available on MSL and 2) study the role and effectiveness of analogue studies as training exercises for planetary exploration. The samples gathered for this exercise are now being used to check calibration of MSL instruments as well as to identify and understand the diversity of geologic materials present in a complex impact structure. Haughton Impact Structure: The Haughton impact structure lies within the Canadian Arctic on Devon Island, Nunavut territory (75°22’N, 89°41’W).  The area consists mainly of Paleozoic carbonate-sulfate sediments overlying a gneissic basement. The impact structure, ~ 23km in diameter, is the result of an impact 39 mya (Late Eocene) [1]. With both limited precipitation and a lack of vegetation, the geologic record of the impact and its associated deposits are relatively well preserved by the polar desert. Haughton as an Analogue for Gale Crater.  The use of analogue sites in the planetary explorations field provides essential training and testing environments; the Haughton site is ideal for analogue studies of Martian exploration.  Haughton and Gale share many similarities: they are both complex impact structures, the target rocks are sedimentary in origin, and both contain deposits of post-impact fluvial and lacustrine processes.  NASA hosts an initiative at the impact structure called the Haughton-Mars Project. The goals of this project are to understand the geology of the crater and also to use the environment as testing grounds for future planetary explorations [2]. Field site. This study focuses on an area (Figure 1) of the crater with abundant hydrothermal vents near Trinity Lake. It is a geologically complex area displaying evidence for hypervelocity impact (shatter cones), hydrothermal activity (iron cementation and carbonate/sulfate mineral re-precipitation) [3], periglacial processes (polygons), and limited biologic features (epilithic lichen, fossilized stromatolites). The recent discovery of iron-rich cements on Mars, by ChemCam, [4] makes this site particularly interesting for MSL analogue studies.  Figure 2. A simulated MastCam image of the sample area (the red box in Figure 1) showing hydrothermal alteration. Samples: Ten samples were collected from the site and prepared as thin sections. Eight were unaltered carbonates and carbonate breccias; these were prepared as 2”x1” rectangular thin sections. Two represented the hydrothermally altered material (Figures 2 & 3); these were prepared as 1” circular thin sections.  ChemCam Analysis: LIBS (laser induced breakdown spectroscopy) analysis was performed at Los Alamos National Laboratory with the ChemCam laboratory unit, a 1064nm Nd:YAG laser. Operating conditions consisted of a beam current of ~14.8mJ, set at a distance of ~1.5m. The laser sampled each spot ten times at ~5ns/pulse. All analyses were performed in a Mars atmospheric chamber with CO2 and a pressure of ~7 Torr. Microprobe Analysis: Electron microprobe analysis was performed at the University of New Mexico using a JEOL AXA 8200 SuperProbe.  2305.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Three of the ten thin sections were analyzed in the electron microprobe. These included an unaltered carbonate (Unconpahgre), carbonate impact breccias (TLD1B08-4), and hydrothermally altered carbonate impact breccias (TLH-9, Figure 3).  Operating conditions for the X-ray point analysis consisted of a beam current of 20nA, a beam diameter of ~5µm, and an accelerating voltage of 15kV. The elements analyzed were: Na, Mg, Al, Si, S, K, Ca, Ti, Cr, Fe, Sr, and Ba.   Operating conditions for X-ray mapping consisted of a beam current of 40nA and an accelerating voltage of 15kV. Stage maps were constructed using 2µm pixels with a dwell time of 30ms/pixel and a total size of 500x500 pixels. WDS: O, Mg, Si, S, Fe; EDS: Ca.   Figure 3. A color image showing a trail of LIBS shots across the thin secion of TLH-9, a sample from the area shown in Figure 2. Image is ~1 cm across. Results: ChemCam. The LIBS analysis produced quality results from the thin sections, and showed the penetration depth of the laser in a carbonate target. Each shot was assumed to “drill” ~2µm/pulse into the ~30µm thick carbonate thin sections; however, when plotting the spectra an unusual trend in Si, Na, Ca, and a few other elements was noted. The Si and Na (components of the glass slide) increased after the fifth shot while Ca (a main constituent of the carbonate rock) decreased after the fifth shot. This suggests that after the fifth laser pulse the rock was completely vaporized and the glass slide sampled. For that reason, all LIBS spectra were gated, using only the first four laser pulses for every sampling location. Therefore, each shot “drilled” ~6µm per pulse into the ~30µm thick carbonate thin sections. Electron Microprobe. Backscattered electron images (Figure 4) of all LIBS laser pits were collected on the three samples. X-ray point analysis was performed in 4-5 locations around every LIBS laser pit for representative sampling. X-ray mapping was performed on four LIBS laser pits for the sample TLD1B08-4 and on two LIBS laser pits for the sample TLH-9 (Figure 5).  Spot analysis and X-ray mapping confirmed high amounts of carbonate elements in all the sections as well as abundant Fe and S in the hydrothermally altered samples. Trace elements (Sr, Ba) also seen in the LIBS spectra were verified using the microprobe.  Figure 4. A BSE image of a laser pit (the red oval) representing an analysis from Figure 3 (the red arrow).  Figure 5. X-ray map of Figure 3 rotated 90º left. Sub images left- right, top-bottom: Si, S, Mg, Fe, O, & Ca. Conclusions: Electron microprobe analysis is a powerful tool for confirming ChemCam analysis. This kind of multi-instrument verification will aid in obtaining accurate measurements from MSL on Mars. Geology. Through this study much was learned about the geochemistry, mineralogy, and processes at work within the study area. Each analysis yielded valuable information about the area’s geologic history.  Future Work. These analyses and samples will continue to unveil the history of this site, and giant impacts in general, with upcoming investigations. The samples and data used in this simulation may be available upon request for further research purposes. References: [1] Osinski G.R. et al. (2005) Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 40, Nr 12, 1759-1776. [2] Lee P. and Osinski G.R. (2005) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 40, Nr 12, 1755-1758. [3] Izawa M.R.M. et al., (2011) Astrobiology, v. 11(6), 537-550. [4] Blaney D.L. el al., LPSC 2014. Acknowledgements: NASA/JPL/Los Alamos National Lab/MSL/ChemCam (R. Wiens, P.I., H. Newsom, Co-I). UNM Electron Microprobe Lab.  2305.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
