2307.PDF
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF LUNAR LOCALIZED PYROCLASTIC DEPOSITS.  D. Trang1 J. J. GillisDavis1 J. T. S. Cahill2 B. J. Thomson3 R. R. Ghent4,5, B. R. Hawke1 T. A. Giguere1, 1Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai'i at MÄnoa, Honolulu, HI, (dtrang@higp.hawaii.edu) 2Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD, 3Center for Remote Sensing, Boston University, Boston, MA. 4Department of Earth Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 5Planetary Science Institute, Tuscon, AZ.   Introduction:  Over a hundred pyroclastic deposits are known to exist on the Moon [1], and they are targets of high scientific interest since they are among the most primitive samples of the lunar interior. Analysis of data from recent missions is expanding the number of recognized deposits [2]. Pyroclastic deposits are divided into two classes, regional (>2500 km2) and localized (<2500 km2) [3]. In general, pyroclastic deposits have a low albedo, smooth surfaces, low radar backscatter, and associated with irregular depressions and rilles [e.g., 2-4]. Compositionally, lunar pyroclastics are known to erupt glass and crystalline beads. The glass beads are identified remotely from their broad absorption features in the near infrared [5]. In contrast, the crystalline beads exhibit a flat spectrum [6].  Localized Pyroclastic Deposits: In this study, we focus on characterizing the physical properties of localized pyroclastic deposits. Localized pyroclastic deposits are commonly associated with floor-fractured craters (e.g., Schrodinger, Alphonsus), but occasionally are found on the edges of basins, such as Grimaldi [e.g., 4,7]. Unlike the spectra of regional pyroclastic deposits, which typically display glassy or crystalline beads [e.g., 6], localized pyroclastic deposits show basaltic-like, highlands-like, or olivinelike spectra [4,7]; even though these deposits are likely to contain pyroclastic beads. Previous studies of the physical properties of localized pyroclastic deposits are from observations of the deposits in Alphonsus [8]. Depth and areal observations of the deposits and the vents allowed [8] to determine their eruptive style. In investigating various eruptive conditions, they found a transient eruption agreed with their observations. They interpret that first, volatiles accumulated at a hydrostatic elevation, which built up pressure. Eventually, the pressure built to the point that the material erupted in a single burst displacing both nonjuvenile and juvenile material. The expected amount of country rock relative to juvenile material may be up to 50%. This may explain why the spectra of localized pyroclastic deposit are dominated by basaltic or highlands-type material instead of dominantly pyroclastic material.  Here, we add to previous studies by constraining the physical properties of localized pyroclastic deposits globally. The descriptions of localized pyroclastic deposits from our work will lead to models of explosivity, similar to [8], which will test whether this eruptive style is the case for all localized pyroclastic deposits or whether Alphonsus is a unique case.  Methods: The objective of this study is to describe the rock abundance on the surface and contained within localized pyroclastic deposits. This is completed using data from the Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment and the Miniature Radio-Frequency (MiniRF). Specifically, we use the surface rock abundance map, which was derived from the anisothermality of the lunar surface [9]. These maps are sensitive to rocks on the surface of >1 m in size. In addition, we employ the 12.6-cm (S-band) circular polarization ratio (CPR) maps, as radar is sensitive to both blocks on the surface and subsurface [e.g., 10]. The 12.6-cm radar can penetrate up to about ten times the incident wavelength (~1 m) and is sensitive to rocks about a centimeter to a meter across [11].   We determine the mean surface rock abundance and CPR of over thirty localized pyroclastic deposits (Figure 1). We select deposits from previously identified pyroclastic deposits [1,2] and choose only the deposits that exhibit nearly flat topography and the extent of the deposit is easily defined in Clementine 750-nm maps. As a result, we examine 33 localized pyroclastic deposits. We use these criteria because topographic slopes can create reflections in radar and steep slopes may contain blocks due to down slope movement. Next, we use the Clementine 750-nm data to map the individual deposits. Surface rock abundance and CPR analysis were completed through taking the mean of all the pixels within the deposit. However, due to the steep slopes along vents and rilles, which produces blocks that may not be from an eruption, but due to erosion, we did not include pixels from these areas Results: We find that the localized pyroclastic deposits form two groups, a block-rich and a blockpoor group (Figure 2). The block-poor group had a range of rock concentration from 0.0025 to 0.0039, whereas the rock concentration of the block-rich group ranges from 0.0044 to 0.0059. For comparison, the background or nearby areas have rock concentration that range from about 0.0037 to 0.0056, which is more consistent with the block-rich groups. In contrast to localized pyroclastic deposits, regional deposits exhibit 2307.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
low rock concentrations [9]. For example, the regional pyroclastic deposit, Aristarchus, we find that the rock concentration was about 0.0005.  When we examine the CPR results from the MiniRF, we notice a similar dichotomy between block-rich and block-poor deposits (Figure 3). Furthermore, we observe that the pyroclastic deposits that are in the block-rich group in the radiometer data is highly correlated with the same high CPR deposits in the radar and vice versa. This is not too surprising since the CPR is measuring similar properties as the surface rock abundance map. Therefore, these results increase our confidence in the observation of two different rock population groups. As with the surface rock abundance, we compare the radar to regional pyroclastic deposits. We find that the CPR of a regional pyroclastic deposit, Southwest Humorum, is 0.18, which is significantly lower than most localized pyroclastic deposits.  Discussion: The initial results from the radar and the radiometer showed consistent and surprising results. Instead of detecting a gradation of different rock abundances among the localized pyroclastic deposits, which would probably indicate an assortment of different mixtures of juvenile to non-juvenile material, we observe two block populations, a blockpoor and a block-rich population. The eruptive models produced by [8] only modeled pyroclastic deposits from Alphonsus, a rock-poor region. In having two different block populations could indicate two different eruption styles due to different environmental conditions or different eruptive behavior.  Future Work: In addition to the surface rock abundance and CPR data set, we will investigate the thermophysical properties of these deposits to strengthen the current results. We will also determine whether there is a relationship between the surface rock abundance to vent geometry, depth of the deposit, and composition. Localized pyroclastic deposits are thought to be composed of juvenile (glass beads) and non-juvenile material, perhaps we may observe a relationship between band depth and centers to rock abundance. To investigate this relationship, we will examine data from the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), a hyperspectral imager that covers the visible to near-infrared [12]. The ultimate goal of this work is to constrain the physical and compositional properties calculated from the variety of remote sensing data sets to produce an eruptive model for each localized pyroclastic deposit.  References: [1] Gaddis et al. (2003), Icarus, 161, 262-280. [2] Gustafson et al. (2012), JGR, 117, E00H25 [3] Gaddis et al. (2000), JGR, 105, 42454262. [4] Gaddis L. et al. (1985), Icarus, 61, 461-489. [5] Bell P.M and H.K. Mao (1972), Proc. Lunar Sci. Conf. 3rd, 545-553. [6] Pieters et al. (1974), Science, 183, 1191-1194. [7] Hawke et al. (1989), Proc. Lunar Sci. Conf. 19th, 255-268. [8] Head J.W. and L. Wilson (1979), Proc. Lunar Sci. Conf. 10th, 10, 2861-2897. [9] Bandfield et al. (2011), JGR, 116, E00H02. [10] Carter et al. (2011), Proc. Of the IEEE, 99(5), 770-782. [11] Ghent et al. (2005), JGR, 110, E02005. [12] Pieters et al. (2009), Curr. Sci., 96(4), 500-505.     Figure 1: Locations of localized pyroclastic deposits used in this study.   Figure 2: The surface rock abundance reveals two block populations among localized pyroclastic deposits.    Figure 3: The circular polarization ratios also display two block populations among localized pyroclastic deposits, confirming the existence of the two groups among the sampled pyroclastic deposits.   2307.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
