2319.PDF
Satellite Formation around the Rapidly Rotating, Oblong Asteroid Kleopatra.  F. E. Laipert1, D. A. Minton2,and  J.  M. Longuski1.  1Purdue University, School of Aeronautics and  Astronautics,  701 W. Stadium Ave.,  WestLafayette, IN 47907, 2Purdue University, Dept. of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, 550 Stadium MallDr., West Lafayette, IN 47907Introduction: Kleopatra is a 217 km long M-typeasteroid orbiting in the main asteroid belt. Because itis  an  M-type  asteroid  with  a  fairly  flat,  featurelessspectrum,  it  is inherently difficult  to study using  remote observations  compared  to other  types of asteroids. In addition, Kleopatra has an unusual dog-boneshape (see Fig.  1) and two natural  satellites orbitingaround it  [1].  The satellites orbit  at  radii  of 454 kmand 678 km, with the innermost being 6.9 km in diameter and the outermost being 8.9 km in diameter.Here, we focus on the presence of the two satellitesrecently  found  orbiting  Kleopatra.  One  hypothesisabout the origin of the satellites is that they formed ina single large impact that also gave Kleopatra its elongated shape [1].  We consider  an alternative hypothesis: that a significant portion of the satellites' mass iscomprised of ejecta produced in smaller impacts overthe lifetime of Kleopatra. Kleopatra's shape gives riseto a gravity field that is much different than that of aspherical body. For a spherical body, the gravitationalfield is well represented by that  of a point mass. Depending on its departure velocity, ejecta that is movingunder the influence of a point-mass gravity field willfollow one of two types of trajectories: closed (elliptical) or open (hyperbolic). Ejecta on a closed trajectorywill return to the surface while ejecta on an open trajectory will leave the system entirely. In this scenariothere  is  little  chance  ejecta  will  accumulate  in  orbit(unless non-gravitational forces are considered).In contrast, an elongated object such as Kleopatrahas  a  gravity field  that  allows for  a  third  result  inwhich ejecta neither immediately returns nor escapes.Ejecta  departing  Kleopatra  under  certain  conditions(departure  location,  velocity, and  direction)  may endup in  a  quasi-stable orbit  where it  could remain  forsome time before returning  to Kleopatra  or escapingthe  system.  This  concept  is  illustrated  in  Figure  2.While  in  this  quasi-stable  orbit,  the  ejecta  has  agreater likelihood of colliding with one of Kleopatra'ssatellites.  Over time,  a  great  amount  of ejecta couldaccumulate on the satellites.Method: This work is divided into two parts: First,we estimate the total mass of ejecta we can expect tohave been produced due to impacts over the lifetime ofKleopatra.  Second, we estimate what fraction of thatejecta material  may have remained  in  a  quasi-stableorbit around Kleopatra—neither  returning  directly tothe surface nor escaping.To answer the first part, we assume Kleopatra hasseen roughly the same impact history as the asteroidVesta, and use results of the Dawn mission [3] to estimate the crater  size distribution  over the  lifetime ofKleopatra.  From the  crater  size distribution,  we canestimate the total  amount  of ejecta produced by impacts  on  Kleopatra  using  results  from  experimentalimpact studies [4].For  the  second  part  of  the  question,  we modelKleopatra's  gravity using  a  tri-axial  ellipsoid  of dimensions 217x94x81 km [5]. Then, given a simulatedimpact  on the surface of the ellipsoid,  we propagateFigure 1: A radar shape model of Kleopatra [2].Figure 2: Ejecta departing at a certain location (horizontal axis) and velocity (vertical axis) may end up in aquasi stable orbit. This plot is valid for the equatorial plane of the ellipsoid, with the contours indicating the Jacobi constant in the rotating frame.2319.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
ejecta trajectories over the range of departure velocities and directions to assess the fate of the ejecta particles  after  impact.  Impact  simulations  are  performedover the surface of the ellipsoid. We then compare thefraction of trajectories that neither immediately returnnor escape to the total number of propagated trajectories, yielding an estimate of the fraction of ejecta material that ends up orbiting the asteroid.Results: Applying the crater distribution measuredby Dawn  at  Vesta,  we estimate  that 7.1×1016 kg  ofejecta  has  been  produced on  Kleopatra  from cratersbetween 1 km and 30 km in diameter. Assuming thesatellites are spherical, we estimate that together theyhave a mass of  2.1×1015 kg. Therefore, the mass ofthe satellites is roughly 3% of the total ejecta mass.From  simulations  of  impacts  on  the  surface  ofKleopatra, approximately 2% of trajectories achieve aquasi-stable state  not  possible for  a  nearly sphericalobject,  where  a  point  mass  model  of gravity  dominates.  Ejecta  following  these  trajectories  spends  alonger time in orbit around Kleopatra,  increasing thelikelihood that it may deposit on one of the satellites.Such ejecta may comprise a significant portion of thesatellites' mass.[1] Descamps  P.  et  al.  (2011)  Icarus,  211,1022-1033. [2] Ostro S. J. et al. (2000) Science, 288,836-839. [3] Marchi  S.  et  al.  (2012)  Science,  336,690-694.  [4] Richardson  J.  E.  (2009)  Icarus,  204,697-715.  [5]  Scheeres  D.  J.  (1993)  Jet  PropulsionLaboratory, Technical Report.2319.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
