 CAN YOU MISS WHAT YOU DON'T SEE?  EROSION PATTERNS OF LAVAS AND IGNIMBRITES ON EARTH AND MARS.  Tracy K.P. Gregg,1 Elisabetta Panza1 and Brandy Buford,1 Dept. of Geology, 411 Cooke Hall, University at Buffalo, Buffalo NY  14260-3050 (tgregg@buffalo.edu).   Introduction:  Tyrrhenus Mons, found in the circum-Hellas region of Mars, is a low-relief, central-vent volcano whose flanks are dissected by radially oriented channels [e.g., 1].  Its low (<2°) flank slopes have been interpreted to have been generated by fluid lavas and pyroclastic materials (most likely pyroclastic density currents [1-3]).  The evidence supporting a pyroclastic origin include:  visible layering (revealed in the erosional scarps bounding the volcanoes' deposits); a friable nature (inferred from the erosional channels dissecting the volcanoes' flanks); and the likelihood that the radial channels dissecting Tyrrhenus Mons have been modified by groundwater sapping processes.  Modeling of possible pyroclastic flows from Tyrrhenus Mons revealed that pyroclastic flows could likely travel the observed distances on Mars [1, 3]. Hesperia Planum, which surrounds and embays the eastern flank of Tyrrhenus Mons [1] is deformed by intersecting sets of mare-type wrinkle ridges [4, 5].  The presence of these ridges has been used to interpret the Hesperia Planum materials as being composed of multiple layers of fluid lavas [e.g., 2, 6].  However, the presence of wrinkle ridges only requires layered materials.  A comprehensive search of Hesperia Planum [7] using 100 m/px Thermal Emission Imaging Spectrometer (THEMIS) images reveals no primaly volcanic vents, but does reveal rare channels that have morphologies more consistent with a lava-flow origin than a fluvial genesis.  However, it is frustrating to realize that for neither Tyrrhenus Mons nor Hesperia Planum can we determine unequivocally the origin of their materials.  Although the consensus is that Tyrrhenus Mons is composed primarily of pyroclastic materials, the other possibilities include fluid lavas or mudflow deposits.  Similarly, the consensus for the origin of Hesperia Planum materials is that they are composed of fluid lavas, but it is difficult to definitively disprove layered sediments.  Here, we present the preliminary results of our investigations into characterizing the erosional behaviors of layered lava flow deposits and ignimbrite deposits on Earth for comparison with martian deposits. Ignimbrite Morphologies:  As of this writing, we have focused our studies on the Bishop Tuff (Long Valley, California, USA) and various ignimbrites within the Central Andes [e.g., 9 and references therein].  We have used Google Earth combined with the existing literature to characterize these deposits. Terrestrial ignimbrites are characterized by lowrelief surfaces that may contain fumerolic mounds [8] and may be dissected by channels [e.g., 9] and modified by aeolian processes.  De Silva and others [9] reveal that although jointing within Andean ignimbrites plays a role in the formation of yardangs, a strong, persistent wind is more important. "Incipiant yardangs" are evident in the tightly crenulated margins of ignimbrite deposits in the Central Andes [9].  In contrast, the margins of the Bishop Tuff locally display relatively smooth margins that are festooned with carsized, rounded boulders (giving an appearance of crenulations at great distances). There is no clear evidence for fumerolic mounds (or indurated mounds of any kind) within the Tyrrhenus Mons flank materials, nor do the mons materials contain jointing (Figure 1).  It is important to note, however, that a thick (>1 m) layer of dust covers the region (as observed in THEMIS daytime and nighttime images), and could be masking these features.Although Tyrrhenus Mons is dissected by flatfloored radiating channels with amphitheater-shaped heads, the channel walls are smooth and arcuate in planform—not crenulated. Fluid Lava Morphologies:  There is an Amazonian-aged lava flow field that emanates from the summit caldera complex at Tyrrhenus Mons and extends for ~1000 km to the southwest [1].  Lobate flow margins and lava channels are easily identified in this flow field, even though the flow field is covered with at least as much dust as are the Tyrrhenus Mons flank materials.  For comparison, the mons materials display no such features.  Terrestrial flood basalts (such as the Columbia River and Deccan Traps) are characterized by a stair-step appearance on their eroded margins, revealing the alternating weak and strong layers of flow tops and flow interiors, respectively.  On Earth, individual flow layers are on the order of tens of meters thick [10] rather than the hundreds of meters revealed in the stair-step layers seen on the flanks of Tyrrhenus Mons. Thus, the materials composing the Tyrrhenus Mons materials do not appear to share obvious morphologic similarities with terrestrial flood basalt provinces. Discussion:  The materials comprising Tyrrhenus Mons are layered, with individual layers being tens to hundreds of meters thick [e.g., 3, 11].  They extend for almost 800 km from the summit caldera complex [1].  Investigation of THEMIS images, and images from the  Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Context Camera (http://www.msss.com/mro/ctx/ctx_description.html) and images from the High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) (http://hirise.lpl.arizona.edu/) reveal no primary lava flow features (such as lobate flow margins or lava channels) nor ignimbrite features (such as thermal contraction joints, fumerolic mounds, or crenulated erosion margins). In contrast, lava flows are readily identified in the young lava flow field that emanates from the summit caldera complex of Tyrrhenus Mons.  Thus, there is no a prior reason to think that lava flow fields on Mars should look significantly different from lava flow fields on Earth—even if they are significantly eroded (as are, for example, Earth's Deccan Traps). Ignimbrites on Earth, however, are the result of an intimate mixture of eruption processes (magma composition, eruption temperature, and mass eruption rate) and ambient conditions (interaction with nonmagmatic water and ingestion of the ambient atmosphere.  Sheridan [8], for example,  suggested that the fumerolic mounds observed on Long Valley's Bishop Tuff were a product of internal ignimbrite degassing during cooling rather than escape of pre-existing volatiles heated by the overlying pyroclastic deposit.  Given Mars' thinner atmosphere as compared with Earth, pyroclastic flows would not injest as much gas during emplacement [3] as would similar terrestrial pyroclastic flows.  Without the ingested atmosphere, Mars' pyroclastc density currents might not generate fumerolic mounds or even suffer the same degree of contraction as the ignimbrites cool and degas.  Thus, there may be physical reasons why a martian ignimbrite might be less indurated, or modified differetly, from a similar pyroclastic density current on Earth.  Pyroclastic deposits may therefore be much more common on Mars than has been previously recognized—including the materials comprising Hesperia Planum. Conclusions:  We will continue to characterize the erosional morphologies of terrestrial ignimbrites and fluid lava flow fields on Earth as analogs to Mars.  In the future, we will examine the erosional morphologies for mudflows as well.  To date, our observations are consistent with the flank materials of Tyrrhenus Mons being composed primarily of pyroclastic deposits rather than weathered, stacked lava flows, but have significant morphologic distinctions. References: [1] Greeley, R. and D.A. Crown, 1990, J. Geophys. Res. 95(B5):7133-7149, doi: 10.1029/JB095iB05p07133. [2] Greeley, R. and P.D. Spudis, 1980, Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 19(1):13-41. [3] Gregg, T.K.P. and M.A. Farley, 2006, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 155(1-2):81-89. [4] Goudy, C.L. and Gregg, T.K.P., 2002 LPSC XXXIII, Abstract #1135.  [5] Goudy, C.L. et al., 2005, J. Geophys. Res. 110(E10), doi: 10.1029/2004JE002293. [6]  Greeley, R. and Guest, J.E., 1987, USGS IMap 1802-B, 1:15,000,000.  [7] Gregg, T.K.P., and Roberts, C., 2011, GSA Abstracts with Programs 43(5):675. [A] [8] Sheridan, M.F., 1973, Geol. Soc. Amer. Bull. 81(3):851-868. [9] deSilva, S.L. et al., 2010, Planet. Space Sci. 58:459-471. [10] Self, S. et al., 1997, in Am. Geophys. Union Mongraph 100:381-410. [11] Gregg, T.K.P. et al., 1998, USGS IMap -20252, 1:500,000.   Figure 1.  HiRISE image EXP_017352_1590_RED.abrowse.jpg.  Image width ~ 5 km, centered on the northeast flank of Tyrrhenus Mons at 107.3°E, 20.5°S.  "Rilles" are volcanic or volcano-tectonic features cross-cutting the flank (or mons) materials of Tyrrhenus Mons.  Image courtesy NASA/PJL/LPL. 