2332.PDF
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF ADSORPTION KINETICS IN BASALT AND CLAY: IMPLICATIONS FOR DIURNAL VARIATIONS OF MARTIAN ATMOSPHERIC WATER.  H. N. Farris1, V. F. Chevrier1, D. Kennington1, and K. L. Bryson2, 1Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Sciences, University of Arkansas, 202 Old Museum Building, Fayetteville, AR 72701, hnfarris@uark.edu, 2Department of Physics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23220.  Introduction:  The stability of ice on Mars is affected by factors such as latitude and depth, as well as the thermal properties of the regolith, thus ice is unstable in equatorial regions at geologically short timescales [1]. Concentrations of water in equatorial regions may be attributed to water-rich minerals like sulfates [2], metastable water ice [3] and clays [1]. Variations in Martian orbital parameters have resulted in large-scale transport of this equatorial water towards the poles.  The distribution of ice is governed by thermodynamics and kinetics.  These kinetics are largely dependent on the adsorptive and diffusive properties of regolith [5], which are studied through simulation experiments on regolith analogs such as basalt and montmorillonite.  Previous measurements were limited to only clay [6] or to constant temperature [7], although kinetics of adsorption are largely dependent on temperature.  This could creat local accumulations of water vapor potentially leading to liquids.  Moreover, numerical models of water ice stability often require kinetic parameters that are lacking for Mars relevant materials.  Methodology: Basalt was chosen because of its ubiquity on the martian surface, while clay minerals (montmorillonite) are usually excellent adsorbents and could be present in various regions.  Samples of montmorillonite (Panther Creek, CO) and basalt (Somerset Co., NJ) were first ground and sieved to <63Âµm and dried by baking in a vacuum oven at 102 Â± 1Â°C and 35 mbar for one day.  The sample was then removed from the oven, sealed in a desiccator and cooled to -20Â°C in a freezer to eliminate any remaining moisture.  The regolith was then deposited into petri dishes (15 cm diameter) in layers 1-2 mm thick. The chamber was evacuated to the <0.09 mbar and then filled with CO2 gas to atmospheric pressure, while a methanol/dry ice slurry was flowed through the cooling coils to chill the chamber to below 0Â°C.  Then the chamber was opened, the sample placed atop a balance, a water source was added (block of ice), and the chamber was reclosed and evacuated to 7 mbar.  A continuous flow of CO2 while pumping was used to maintain the desired relative humidity inside the chamber. The experiment was then run for 4-8 hours, the time necessary for the sample to reach saturation.  During this time, mass, pressure, temperature, and humidity data were recorded every minute.  Finally, once the experiment was terminated, the sample was heated in the vacuum oven and measuring the mass difference determined the amount of water absorbed.  Results: Mass-loss curves (Fig. 1-2) show the increase of adsorbed water over time.  They all have a similar shape with an initial slope at t = 0 and eventually reach a plateau after a certain amount of time, which varies depending on the material.   Figure 1 Mass loss curve of water adsorbed onto basalt under Martian simulated conditions at -1Â°C, 5.7% relative humdity.  The sample reached equilibrium after ~4.2 hrs.  Figure 2 Mass loss curve of water adsorbed onto montmorillonite under Martian simulated conditions at about   3Â°C, 15% relative humdity. The sample reached equilibrium after ~2.7 hrs. 2332.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
The montmorillonite sample adsorbed nearly double the amount of water (g/g) in nearly half the time as the basalt sample.   Figure 3: Adsorption kinetic constant as a function of temperatue for experiments on basalt.    Figure 4 Adsorption kinetic constant as a function of temperature for the experiments on montmorillonite.  There is a general trend showing a decrease in adsorption constant with an increase in temperature.  Discussion: Adsorption of gases onto surfaces is usually described by the Langmuir isotherm:  !! = 1 +  Â  !!"   (1) where P is the partial pressure of water. Î± is the   Langmuir adsorption constant, and Î¸ is the percentage of the area covered by water molecules: ðœƒ =  Â  !!!!!!!!!    (2) where ma is the mass of the adsorbed water (g/g), As is the effective grain size area, l is the monolayer thick- ness, and ÏH2O is the density of water. This is only true for low pressures, because at higher pressures multiple molecular layers of water are adsorbed, and therefore is better described by the BET isotherm, which is the   Langmuir expression adjusted for multiple water molecule layers [5]: !!! Â (!!!!) =  Â  !!!! +  Â !!(!!!)!!!         (3) where p' is the measured pressure divided by the saturation pressure of the adsorbate (i.e. the relative humidity), v is the volume of the adsorbed gas, vm is the monolayer adsorbed gas volume, and c is the BET constant.  Knowing the effective surface area of the samples it is possible to determine the amount of surface covered as a function of time and by obtaining a fit to the data in Fig. 1-2 and determine ka and kd, the kinetic constants of adsorption and desorption, from the following expression [6]: ðœƒ =  Â  !!!!!!! [1 âˆ’ ð‘’! !!!!! !]       (4) ka can be determined from the slope of the adsorption kinetic curve at t = 0 since the derivative of equation (4) (dÎ¸/dt reduces). Then the desorption constant, kd, can be determined from the plateau portion (equal to ka/(ka+kd), i.e. (4) at t = âˆž) or a complete fit of the kinetic curve, but only so far for monolayers (i.e. Langmuir). Conclusions: It is still unclear if there exists intrinsic properties of the water that affect the adsorption process: ð‘˜!! = ð‘ð‘˜! =  Â  !!!"#$ ð¶     (5)  where p is atmospheric water vapor, M is the molecular mass of water, R is the ideal gas constant, and C is the sticking coefficient:  ð¶ =  Â ð¶!ð‘’(!!!!!" )            (6)  where Co is a constant dependent on type of adsorbate and Ea is an energy.  For the above experiments, we assumed C = 1 for simplicity, but believe that the addition of C could refine the relationship seem in Fig. 3-4. Additional experiments are planned for the near future, which will expand the current database and increase in complexity.    References:  [1] Chevrier, V.F. et al. (2008) Icarus, 196, 459-476. [2] Jakosky, B.M. et al. (2005) Icarus, 175, 58-67. [3]Chevrier, V.F. et al. (2007) GRL, 34. [4] Poulet, F. et al. (2005) Nature, 481, 623-627. [5] Brunauer, S. et al. (1938) J. Am. Chem. Soc., 60, 308-319. [6] Zent, A.P., et al. (2001) JGR, 106(7), 1466714674. [7] Beck, P. et al. (2010) JGR 115. 2332.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
