2340.PDF
EVIDENCES FOR COPPER BEARING MINERALS IN SHALBATANA VALLEY, MARS.  Popa C.1, F. G. Carrozzo2, Di Achille G.1, S. Silvestro3, F. Esposito1, V. Mennella1. 11Istituto Nazionale di Astrofisica (INAF)-OAC, Napoli, Italy. 2IFSI-Rome, Italy, 3Carl Sagan Center, SETI Institute, CA, USA  Introduction: One of the main uses of hyperspectral imaging in geological fields is characterization of alterations in mining districts on Earth, often represented by secondary minerals as a result of weathering of primary minerals (silicates). The technique mostly  tracks indirectly the main mineralization via mapping of alterations specific to well defined alteration zones (e.g. alteration in porphyry copper ore bodies [1, 2]). Although a modern diffuse method we know no instance of a spaceborne or airborne direct detection of copper ore minerals on Earth. Here we report a case of direct identification of copper minerals related to supergene like alteration in Shalbatana Valley palaeolacustrine system on Mars, and the implications to past atmosphere-hydrosphere-lithosphere interaction. Shalbatana Valley: A channel system in the western hemisphere of Mars with a complex formation path [3]. The system hosts numerous morphologic evidences of water input into the system as well as deposits related to water permanence in the past [4]. The morphology is well documented and is proven to represent sediments formed in a paleolake environment [5].    Figure 1 Mineral mapping in the Shalbatana paleolake sediment area. The red area are represented chiefly by phyllosilicates, while the green area is characterized by the spectrum in figure 2. Data analysis: MRO data was used for a comprehensive characterization of the area: a) CRISM data was used for mineral characterization, while b) CTX and HIRISE images and reconstructed topography served to correlate the mapped mineral units. The alteration products are mainly represented by Fe and/or Mg phyllosilicates and are confined in the light toned parts of the etched sediments deposited in the paleolake (see Figure 1). Spectral identification: While most of the water related mineralogy is straightforward to identify (merely Al and Mg, Fe phyllosilicates) we found a specific spectral signature that is different from anything described so far on Mars (Figure 2).  Figure 2 Spectrum characterizing the green area in Figure 1. Its distinctive spectral features are the 1.41, 1.91, and 2.26 µm band absorptions.   The comparison against many databases pointed out that the presence of M-OH absorption band at 2.26 µm is due to the presence of Cu in the structure of the minerals found in the green mapped area. While Cu is undoubtedly responsible for the presence of the 2.26 µm spectral band, there is not a straightforward association to specific Cu mineral phases (Figure 3). The detailed study of the spectral characteristics of many Cu phases shows that the best candidate is chrysocolla, a mineraloid phase that forms as secondary phase in supergene alteration zones of sulfides. Although best candidate, various other mineral paragenesis in Figure 3 show that chrysocolla present in small amounts modifies the overall spectral response of the mixture, making it similar to that of chrysocolla dominating phases. We identified two examples that describe well this behavior: i) a small amount of chrysocolla in allophane  2340.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 3 Spectral library of Cu phases of interest. Red - pure chrysocolla, black- allophane with small amounts of Cu, green hydrated pure allophane, purple - dehydrated allophane, blue - pure malachite, cyan - contaminated malachite. Pure allophane spectra taken from [6]. Other spectra taken from USGS and Aster spectral libraries.  modifies radically the spectrum of allophane (purple to black spectra in Figure 3). Quantities as low as 0.3 % copper can account for this spectral response, and ii) small amounts of chrysocolla in malachite results in a spectral response similar to chrysocolla only phase (blue to cyan spectra in Figure 3). Discussion: The copper phases are detected in the eroded sediments that make the northern rim border of the paleolake, just above the light toned phyllosilicate bearing units (Figure 4). The "chrysocolla bearing unit" outcrops on a 1000 x 300 m strip with a thickness of about 20 m. Remains of the unit appears to outcrop along the rim of the sedimentary basin but there are no other CRISM orbits to complete the full mineral mapping of the deposit, although a ring pattern is obvious in Figure 1. Even at 0.3 % enrichment (for worst case of enrichment as for the example above for Cuallophane) for Cu, the deposit would be an important marker for the formational process that would qualify on Earth as a supergene level of enrichment due to interaction with oxygen and water. Chrysocolla generally precipitates as a gel in under saturated waters with respect to H4SiO4, having a broad pH-Eh stability field, while also depending on many other factors (e.g. pCO2). It is not clear whether the primary copper minerals are of sedimentary or magmatic origin, with the later being more probable [7]. The unit may represent a multistep formation process with many mobilizationdeposition cycles.    Figure 4 Up: The area where the Cu bearing unit outcrops, down: HIRISE dtm profile along AB.   Conclusion: There is an unambiguous detection of a copper phase in Shalbatana paleolake sediments. Chrysocolla is most likely the phase responsible for the detection, although there is no way to tell if it is the major or minor phase in a paragenesis very likely related to a supergene like alteration of primary (sulfide) copper minerals. There is no way to exclude or to prove the presence of other common copper minerals like malachite and/or azurite, or association with other phases (e.g. allophane). The very presence of chrysocolla though is an important indicator of a redox system which oxidized copper from Cu+ to Cu2+, in an oxidizing environment during the deposit formation. Moreover this may be the proof of a different atmosphere composition (local or global?) at formation time. References: [1] Lowell, J. D. and Guilbert, J. M., 1970.. Econ. Geol. 65, 373-408. [2] Sillitoe, R. H., 1973. Econ. Geol. 68, 799-815; [3] Cabrol, N. A., et al., 1997. Icarus. 125, 455-464; [4] Di Achille, G., et al., 2009. Geoph. Res. Letters. 36, L14201; [5] Di Achille, G., et al., 2007. JGR Planets 112. [6] Bishop, J. L., et al., 2013. Clays and Clay Minerals. 61, 57-74. [7] Burns, R. G., Fisher, D. S., 1990. JGR: Solid Earth. 95, 14169-14173. 2340.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
