 TEMPERATURE, PH, AND BRINE EFFECTS ON ALUNITE DISSOLUTION: IMPLICATIONS FOR MARS.  J. L. Miller 1, M. E. Elwood Madden 1, A. S. Elwood Madden 1, and B. N. Pritchett 2. 1 University of Oklahoma School of Geology and Geophysics, 100 East Boyd St, Suite 710, Norman, OK 73019 (Jamie.Miller-1@ou.edu), 2 Oklahoma Geological Survey, University of Oklahoma, 100 East Boyd St, Suite N131, Norman, OK 73019.   Introduction:  Water is necessary for all known life; therefore, determining the duration of liquid water on Mars is crucial to understanding its habitability. Alunite (KAl3(SO4)2(OH)6) is a hydrated sulfate occurring in wet, acidic environments rich in S and Al. Sulfates have been observed on Mars in areas such as Meridiani Planum and Iani Chaos [1,2], providing evidence of past liquid water. Temperature, pH and activity of water affect the degree to which minerals dissolve in water, controlling their lifetimes. The purpose of this study is to determine the rate of alunite dissolution in water at varied pH (1-8), temperature (278-323 K), and brines (NaCl, CaCl2) conditions. Results for alunite are compared to previous works investigating jarosite ((K, Na) Fe3(SO4)2(OH)6), the ferric sulfate end-member of the solid solution series. Dissolved K concentrations were used to determine surface area normalized dissolution rates, and compared to A-cation site concentrations in previous jarosite studies. Methods: Alunite used in this study was synthesized [3], and confirmed 100 weight percent alunite with powder X-ray diffraction analysis. The surface area of the alunite particles was measured to be 26 m 2g 1 with BET, which was later used to calculate surface area normalized dissolution rates.  Dissolution experiments were conducted at varied temperatures (278, 295, 313, and 323 K) in ultrapure water (18 MΩ), solutions over a range of pH values (1, 2, 5, 6, and 8), and in saturated NaCl and CaCl2 brines. Experiments at 278 K were conducted in a refrigerator while 313 and 323 K experiments were conducted on a hot plate controlled by a thermocouple to stabilize temperature.  The pH was adjusted as follows: pH 1 and 2 in H2SO4, pH 5 in unbuffered ultrapure water, pH 6 in NaOH (initial solution was pH 10), and pH 8 in Tris+HCl solution. Brine experiments took place in fully saturated solutions: 360 g NaCl per liter of water and 750 g CaCl2 per liter. All experiments were completed in triplicate and contained 0.001 g alunite per mL solution. Experimental alunite solution slurries were stirred to mix the solutions, keeping the alunite completely suspended for the duration of experiments. Over the course of each experiment lasting two days, an unfiltered 2 mL aliquot of slurry was collected with a syringe for pH measurement. Next, a 10-mL aliquot of slurry was collected and filtered through a 0.2 μm acetate syringe filter into a sample tube and refrigerated until analyzed by flame Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (AAS). Concentrations of Al and K cations were measured with AAS for each 10-mL aliquot. Matrix-matched standards were used to construct calibration curves. Dissolution rates were calculated from curves constructed by plotting the concentrations versus sampling times. Dissolution rate curves were plotted separately for initial rates (first hour of experiment) and long-term rates (the duration of the experiment), because the initial rate was distinctively faster than the long-term rate. By plotting the two rates separately, rates could be fitted linearly to acquire the slope of each line directly to represent the dissolution rate. Once dissolution rates were obtained from the slopes of the lines, they were surface area normalized to obtain surface area normalized dissolution rates (mol m −2 s −1 ). pH effects:  The long-term dissolution rate based on potassium release minimizes at pH 6 (Fig. 1). Longterm K dissolution rates for alunite (expressed as log rate in units of mol m -2 s -1 ) range from -10.8 to -11.6 over pH 1-8. Comparable dissolution rates from previous studies range from -7.5 to -9.1 for K-jarosite [4], and from -6.6 to -7.4 for Na-jarosite [5]. A comparison of all three sulfates shows that Na-jarosite is the fastest, followed by K-jarosite, and finally, alunite is the slowest to dissolve. Dissolution rates of the three sulfates reach minimums at different pHs: alunite at pH 6, Kjarosite at pH 3.8, and Na-jarosite at 3.5.   Figure 1. pH effects on alunite (red squares) and jarosite (green and blue) dissolution rates. Alunite dissolution rate minimizes at higher pH than jarosite, so it is likely preserved in higher pH fluids. Temperature effects:  Long-term K dissolution rates range from -10.8 to -11.4 over the temperature range, minimizing at 295 K (Fig. 2). Comparable dis  solution rates from previous studies range from -9.2 to -8.6 for K-jarosite [4], and from -8.8 to -9.5 for Najarosite [5]. K-jarosite rates are fastest, followed by Na-jarosite, then alunite. Dissolution rates of the jarosites steadily increase as temperature increases; in alunite, minimum rates occur at 295 K. Furthermore, dissolution rates level as temperature increases in alunite, in contrast to jarosite, which increases continuously.  Figure 2. Temperature effects on alunite (red) and jarosite (blue and green) dissolution rates. Alunite dissolution rate minimizes at higher temperature than jarosite, so it may be more prevalent in hydrothermally altered deposits. Brine effects:  Finally, alunite dissolution rates were studied in NaCl and CaCl2 saturated brines. In saturated NaCl brine (aH2O =0.75), Al and K both increase rapidly initially. However, K concentration initially increases faster than Al, then levels. Al concentration increases more steadily. In saturated CaCl2 (aH2O=0.35), Al concentration dips then steadily increases, while K concentration initially increases rapidly before leveling (Fig. 3). Similar results were observed for jarosite [6].  Figure 3. Al and K concentration plotted against time in saturated CaCl2 (aH2O=0.75). Al concentration dips then steadily increases, while K concentration initially increases rapidly before leveling. Alteration products:  Al-rich alteration products at pH 6 and 8 were investigated using both powder XRD and TEM electron diffraction, since dissolution appears to be incongruent over this pH range (observed Al:K ratio = 1:2, while congruent dissolution would produce ratios = 2.5). No crystalline alteration products were identified by XRD or TEM; however, abundant nanoscale (<10 nm) particles were observed in TEM images, especially after over a week of dissolution at pH 8. The lack of electron diffraction signal from these particles suggests that amorphous Al phases affect Al solubility and may explain the incongruent dissolution. Implications for Mars:  The dissolution rates determined in this study may be used to reconstruct geochemical systems in Mars' past. Understanding how temperature, pH, and solution chemistry affect sulfate dissolution rates helps reconstruct the geologic and climatic setting of Mars when liquid water was present, especially when compared to jarosite. Alunite dissolves slower than isomorphic jarosite in both pH and temperature controlled experiments. Therefore, alunite is more likely to be preserved in persistent aqueous systems, due to longer particle lifetimes.  Alunite dissolution rates minimize at higher pH conditions (5-6) compared to jarosite (3-4) (Fig. 2). This is likely due to differences in Fe and Al oxide solubility. Therefore, alunite is more likely to be preserved in higher pH fluids compared to jarosite which buffers aqueous systems at lower pH conditions. Alunite dissolution rates minimize at T= 290-310, likely due to decreased solubility over this temperature range (Fig. 3). Therefore, alunite may be more prevalent than jarosite in hydrothermally altered deposits. Alunite dissolution slows in high salinity brines, following a similar pattern to jarosite [5]. In fact, alunite dissolution rates in brines are comparable to jarosite dissolution rates. Therefore, no difference in prevalence is expected in high salinity brines. Overall, alunite rates suggest that Al-rich sulfates are likely to survive longer than jarosite on Mars and will buffer the system to higher pH, while jarosite dissolves more quickly and buffers the system to a lower pH. Therefore, alunite can survive longer in more basic conditions than jarosite. References:  [1] Sefton-Nash, E. et. al. (2012) Icarus, 221:1. [2] Glotch, T. D., and A. D. Rogers (2007) J. Geophys. Res., 112. [3] Brophy, G. et. al. (1962) American Mineralogist. 47: 112. [4] Elwood Madden M.E. et. al. (2012) GCA, 91, 306-321. [5] Zahrai, S.K. et. al. (2013) Icarus, 223:1. [6] Pritchett, B.N. et. al. (2012) Earth & Planet. Sci. Letters, 357-58. Acknowledgements:  We are grateful to NASA for Mars Fundamental Research Grant NNX09AL18G (2009). Additional thanks is given to Andrew Swindle and Virginia Priegnitz for their lab assistance. 