 IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FORMATION OF THERMALLY METAMORPHOSED CARBONACEOUS    CHONDRITES BASED ON MINERALOGICAL CHANGES IN EXPERIMENTALLY HEATED PRODUCTS OF TAGISH LAKE.  A. Nakato 1, A. J. Brearley 1, R. Jones 1, and K. Ziegler 1, 1 Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico. Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. (aiko@unm.edu).  Introduction: Thermally metamorphosed carbonaceous chondrites (TMCCs) found in Antarctica [e. g., 1, 2] and in hot desert environments [3] since the 1980s suggest that some C-type asteroids were heated and dehydrated after aqueous alteration [e. g., 1]. Studies of TMCCs indicate that the conditions of thermal metamorphism experienced by these meteorites may have been quite variable, suggesting that metamorphism of the TMCCs was complex [e.g., 4, 5].  The Belgica group represents strongly heated TMCCs consisting of secondary silicates formed by decomposition of hydrous minerals during heating [3]. The estimated heating conditions for this group are 10 to 10 3 days at 700 ºC to 1 to 100 hours at 890 ºC [6]. These very short heating durations of thermal metamorphism are inconsistent with internal heating by the decay of the short-lived radionuclide, 26 Al, and suggest that the heat source might be impact-induced heating. Although the petrology of the Belgica group is similar to typical CM2 chondrites, they also have some similarities to the Tagish Lake carbonate-poor lithology with respect to their bulk oxygen isotopic composition and the chemical composition of the matrix. The oxygen isotopic composition of members of the Belgica group lie on or close to the TF line and have lower δ 16 O values than CMs [7], and the matrix exhibits an enrichment in Si compared to CM chondrites [6]. To understand the formation process of the Belgica group TMCCs, we have performed heating experiments on fragments of the Tagish Lake meteorite and observed the mineralogical changes as a function of temperature and duration of heating. Experimental procedures: The heating experiments were performed at four different conditions: 600 ºC for 1 hour (hereafter 600 ºC/1 h), 600 ºC/96 h, 900 ºC/1 h, and 900 ºC/96 h. Two pieces of each Tagish Lake sample particle, approximately 2 × 2 × 0.5 mm each, were prepared for each experiment. During the heating period, the oxygen fugacity was kept at the IW buffer in order to reproduce secondary iron-bearing minerals in the Belgica group meteorites that contain both Fe and Fe 2+ .  For the experimental products, the microstructural and microchemical characteristics of the matrix were determined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and FEGSEM/EDS. Oxygen isotope compositions of the experimental run products after heating will be obtained using the laser fluorination technique at University of New Mexico.  Results: Tagish Lake heated at 600 ºC/1 h: Based on FEGSEM observations, no significant mineralogical changes have occurred during heating. The matrix consists of the Tagish Lake original materials which is the heterogeneous mixture of fine (submicron) and coarser-grained (micron-sized) mineral fragments, and framboidal magnetite which is common in the carbonate-poor lithology can be observed throughout the matrix. Calcite and magnesite are observed in all the heated samples with the same characteristics as unheated Tagish Lake. Detailed TEM observations show that pyrrhotite and pentlandite are present as the sulfide phases in the matrix. Phyllosilicates with a fibrous texture are distributed through the matrix as well. No evidence of the development of fine-grained, anhydrous silicate minerals, such as olivine or pyroxene, as a result of heating are present in the sample matrix at the TEM scale.  Tagish Lake heated at 600 ºC/96 h: SEM observations show a similar texture and mineralogy to unheated samples. However, the microstructure of the matrix is more homogeneous and fine-grained than the unheated and 600 ºC/1 h samples. Although framboidal magnetite still survives, the mineral assemblage of troilite and Fe-Ni metal now dominates. TEM observations of a part of the matrix surrounding framboidal magnetite, confirms the presence of fibrous phyllosilicates, magnetite, pyrrhotite, and pentlandite.   Tagish Lake heated at 900 ºC/1 h: The matrix is homogeneous and fine-grained with a similar texture to the 600 ºC/96 h sample. Instead of framboidal magnetite, troilite-metal assemblages are abundant with triple junction textures resulting from annealing. Pentlandite, which decomposes at 610 ºC, is also absent. The finegrained (submicron) equivalent of this opaque mineral assemblage is also observed by TEM in the matrix of this heated sample. Phyllosilicates with fibrous textures were also observed by TEM in the matrix.  Tiny pyroxene grains (less than 100 nm in size) are rarely observed.    Tagish Lake heated at 900 ºC/96 h: The matrix is quite different from the other samples. It consists of fine-grained materials and has a high porosity. This sample is fragile, because several wide fractures cross cut the matrix, and easily breaks into powder. As in the sample run at 900 ºC/1 h, troilite and Fe-Ni metal are dominant instead of magnetite, pentlandite, and  pyrrhotite. However, the sulfide does not show triple junctions, but consists of more homogeneous grains that appear to be the result of complete melting of pentlandite and pyrrhotite during the longer duration heating than the 900 ºC/1 h experiment. Fe-Ni metal concentrates at the periphery of troilite grains. No phyllosilicates have been detected so far in the matrix by TEM, but significant amounts of secondary pyroxene and a few olivine grains are present. The matrix also contains troilite and Fe-Ni metal, but with grain sizes of approximately a few hundred nanometers, larger than in the 900 ºC/1 h experiment.  Discussion: Based on observations of experimental products at 600 ºC, significant mineralogical changes are only evident after 96 hours, and the main changes are reduction of magnetite to form Fe-Ni metal and the development of troilite. We cannot detect any significant dehydration of phyllosilicate at 600 ºC. On the other hand, at 900 ºC, both reduction and dehydration have occurred. Reduction apparently happens much faster than dehydration because dehydration of the phyllosilicates has not occurred to a significant degree after 1 hour heating, but shows evidence of extensive decomposition after 96 hours heating. Therefore, the reduction reactions are a much more sensitive indicator of thermal heating, because their kinetics are much faster than dehydration. The relative degrees of transformation of the Tagish Lake precursor can be estimated as following; 600 ºC/1 h < 600 ºC/96 h < 900 ºC/1 h < 900 ºC/96 h. These degrees are estimated by observation of mineralogical changes of opaque minerals as a new heating parameter based on this study. Consistent with previous experimental heating studies of hydrous minerals [8] , our new experiments demonstrate that the degree of mineralogical transformation as a result of heating of carbonaceous chondrites is more affected by temperature rather than the duration time.  A comparison of the mineralogy of our experimental results to the Belgica group shows that the sample heated at 900 ºC/1 h reproduces the mineralogical and textural characteristics of the Belgica group meteorites very well. These meteorites contain partially transformed phyllosilicates with a fibrous texture, no secondary grains of olivine and pyroxene more than 100 nm in size, and Fe-Ni metal and troilite assemblage instead of magnetite. In addition, the Si-rich matrix composition of Tagish Lake is also similar to Belgica group. Oxygen isotope measurements of these heating products will provide additional insights into how the bulk oxygen isotopic composition of heated chondrites evolves as function of time and temperature. These data will help place improved constraints on the formational and thermal histories of the parent bodies of the Belgica group meteorites.     Figure 1. BSE images of heated Tagish Lake. (a) Troilite and Fe-Ni metal assemblage in the matrix of Tagish Lake sample 900 ºC/1 h. It shows a 120º triple junction texture resulting from annealing. (b) Troilite and Fe-Ni metal assemblage in Tagish Lake 900 ºC/96 h. The Fe-Ni metal shown by arrows is concentrated on the periphery of the sulfide. Tr: Troilite, M: Fe-Ni metal.  Acknowledgement: This work was partially funded by NASA grant NNX11AK51G to A. J. Brearley (PI).   References: [1] Kimura, M. and Ikeda Y. (1992) Proc. NIPR Symp. on Ant. Met., 5, 74-119. [2] Tomeoka K. (1989) Proc. NIPR Symp. on Ant. Met., 2, 55-74. [3] Ivanova M. A. et al. (2004) 67th Met. Soc., #5013. [4] Nakamura T. (2005) J. of Min. and Pet. Sci., 100, 260-272. [5] Nakato A. et al. (2009) 72nd Met. Soc., #5336. [6] Nakato A. et al. (2008) Earth, Planets and Space, 60, 855-854. [7] Clayton R. N. and Mayeda. T. K. (1984) Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 67, 151-161. [8] Akai J. (1992) Proc. NIPR Symp. on Ant. Met., 5, 120-135. 