2362.PDF
ASSESSING THE POTENTIAL OF DEBRIS-COVERED GLACIERS IN THE UINTA MOUNTAINS AS MARTIAN ANALOGS  B. T. Cardenas1, D. E. Lalich1, E. I. Petersen1, E. A. McKinnon1, C. M. Andry1, S. Nerozzi1, J. S. Levy2, J. W. Holt2.  1Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78758.  2Institute for Geophysics, Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78758  Introduction: Terrestrial analog studies have been particularly useful in investigating the geology of Mars [1].  In an effort to establish an analog for debriscovered ice features in the mid-latitudes of Mars, we investigated a lobate glacial feature in the climatically periglacial Uinta Mountain range in Utah's Ashley National Forest. While our feature exhibited some notable differences from lobate debris aprons (LDAs) and lineated valley fill (LVF) on Mars, we feel there are enough similarities to make direct comparisons.  The glacier investigated here is likely a remnant of the last glacial period in the Uintas, known as the Smiths Fork Glaciation [2], or is possibly even younger. Therefore, it resembles an alpine glacier with surrounding moraines. LDAs and LVF on Mars do not create such features [3]. Environmental conditions in the Uintas would lead to melting of exposed ice while mid-lattitude features on Mars would be subject to sublimation instead.  Despite these differences, both the Uinta glacier and midlatitude ice on Mars are examples of ice preserved under debris in environments where ice would otherwise be unstable at the surface. The Uinta glacier also contains numerous lobes indicating either former or current viscous flow, similar to features on Mars [4]. Noting this similarity, we used boulder counts, ground penetrating radar, and LiDAR to gather more detailed information on such debris-covered ice features on Earth that we hope to extrapolate to mid-latitude ice on Mars.  Figure 1: Map of boulder count locations, LiDAR shot positions, and GPR transect Clast size distribution:  Even with relatively highresolution data, the surfaces of LDAs on Mars can be difficult to characterize.  Instruments like CTX and even HiRISE may not be able to resolve boulders on the tens of cm or even meter scale.   Characterizing the surface of these features accurately is vital in modeling the atmosphere-ice interactions of LDAs on Mars.  Boulder counts on our terrestrial analog may provide a better idea of the surface of these Martian features.   Three ten-by-five meter grids, two five-by-five meter grids, and a single one-by-one meter grid were created at varying distances upslope from the terminal moraine of the debris-covered glacier and split among the three studied lobes (figure 1).  The one-by-one meter grid was placed in a depression in the surface near the glacial head.  All surface boulders within the grids were measured for long- and short-axis length.  Over two-thousand, eight-hundred boulders were examined.  Axes which measured greater than five cm were measured to the closest five cm.  Axes shorter than five cm were measured to the closest cm, and axes which measured less than a cm were identified with a measure of zero cm.  The one-by-one grid in the depression was the only grid to cover an area with fine sediment.  Free surface rocks and partially buried rocks were counted separately, as the dimensions of the partially buried rocks cannot be known for certain.     Table 1: Clast size summary  Table 1 shows the mean long and short axis measurements for each grid and their standard deviations.  The average long axis measurement in most grids is several tens of cm, and the average short axis measurement is in the range of ten cm.  The average boulder in this region would not be resolved at CTX scale, and may only be one to two pixels of a HiRISE image, which could lead to the assumption of a smoother surface than actually exists.  If this terrestrial glacial feature is a good analog to LDAs on Mars, this also challenges the current understanding of the atmosphere2362.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
buried ice interactions of LDAs, which assume LDAs to be covered with a layer of fine sediment, not boulders [4]. Ground Penetrating Radar: Unfortunately, due to surface conditions, GPR was not possible over most of the glacial feature we investigated.  The large size of the boulders and lack of a solid surface made good ground contact difficult and reduced the liklihood of seeing anything but point-scaterrers.  However, at the head of the feature there is a depression which lacks a thick boulder covering.  In this depression we were able to take GPR data in a 24 m line using both 50 MHz and 100 MHz antennas. In each radargram (figure 2), a subhorizontal reflector is visible at about 30 ns time delay.  By performing a central midpoint (CMP) analysis using this reflector, we were able to infer a wave velocity of about .065 m/ns in the first layer.  This corresponds to a dielectric constant of 21.3, which matches the range for wet sand or soil.  Thus, we interpret our radargram as showing a fine sediment layer 2 m deep.   Figure 2: Section of 50 MHz radargram.  Arrow indicates 2 m reflector.  Dewow and SEC2 gain were applied.  Below this reflector the radargram is composed almost entirely of complex scattering.  We believe this scaterring is caused by point reflectors in the subsurface, most likely large boulders buried in a matrix of either ice or dirt.  Without a second reflector below this layer, it is impossible to carry out a CMP and calculate a wave velocity. Finally, at about 15 m depth in the radargram there is an ubrupt change in the magnitude of the power received by the radar antenna.  Above 15 m the radargram shows the scattering described in the previous paragraph, but below there is nothing but instrument noise.  This could be the result of the wave encountering an extremely homogeneous layer such as a layer of pure water ice.  Such layers are easily visible in Martian orbital radar and helped lead to our current understanding of LDAs as debris-covered glaciers [5].  The other possibility is that the radar simply does not get enough power to those depths to see reflections.  Some combination of the two is possible, but given the relative strength of reflectors down to 15 m, it is unlikely that a lack of power is the sole explanation. Given the limited nature of the data, it is difficult to compare our results to Mars.  At the very least, GPR does not rule out the possibility of the Uinta glacier acting as a good analog for Martian mid-latitude ice.  Higher powered or lower wavelength radar data would be necessary to make more definite conclusions, and airborn radar would be able to image more of the subsurface, as well as acting as a better analog to the orbital radar data collected on Mars. LiDAR:  LiDAR scans of the glacial feature and the cirque wall were taken from eleven different positions on, above, and below the glacier.  The product of the scan is a high-resolution (ten cm spatial and vertical) DEM which will serve as a comparison to future scans in an attempt to look for change in the morphology of the feature over time.   Measurable changes in return trips may suggest that a relatively pure layer of ice exists beneath the boulder surface, as opposed to a small amount of interstitial ice or pure talus.  Any visible deformation to the surface as a result of ice flow or loss in ice mass through melting or ablation would provide constraints to the processes shaping similar glacial features on Mars, where slight changes in morphology are not detectable.   Conclusions:  If the glacial features in the Uintas Mountains do contain a relatively pure layer of ice beneath their rocky surfaces, they may serve well as terrestrial analogs to Martian LDAs [5].  Continued LiDAR coverage and GPR scans will help determine the nature and volume of ice beneath the boulder-covered surface.  Measurements of boulders on the surface of the terrestrial landform have suggested that the assumed layer of fine-grained sediment on Martian debris-covered glaciers may be much coarser than previously assumed, which would have implications for the modeling of atmosphere-buried ice interactions.       References:  [1] Leveille, R. (2010) Planetary and Space Science, 58, 631-638.  [2] Laabs, B., Carson, E. (2005) Uinta Mountain Geology. [3] Lucchitta, B. (1984) JGR, 89, B409-B418. [4] Mangold N. (2003) JGR, 108 [5] Holt J.W. (2008) Science, 322, 12351238.   2362.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
