2373.PDF
SUPPORTING SCIENTIST ENGAGEMENT IN EDUCATION AND PUBLIC OUTREACH: RESOURCES FOR HIGHER EDUCATION.  S. R. Buxner1, J. Grier1, N. Gross2, R. Low3, G. Schultz4, B. Meinke5, 1Planetary Science Institute (1700 East Fort Lowell Road Suite 106, Tucson, AZ, 85719; buxner@psi.edu, jgrier@psi.edu). 2Boston University (19 Walden St., Cambridge, MA, 02140; gross@bu.edu), 3Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (1600 Wilson Blvd. Suite 600, Arlington, VA, 22209; rusty_low@strategies.org), 4Astronomical Society of the Pacific (390 Ashton Avenue, San Francisco, CA, 94112; gschultz@astrosociety.org), 5STScI (3700 San Martin Drive, Baltimore, MD 21218; meinke@stsci.edu).  NASA SMD Forums Supporting Scientist Engagement in Education and Public Outreach:  The NASA Science Education and Public Outreach Forums support the NASA Science Mission Directorate (SMD) and its education and public outreach (E/PO) community through a coordinated effort to enhance the coherence, efficiency, and effectiveness of SMD-funded E/PO programs. The Forums foster collaboration between scientists and educators and provide resources to engage a variety of audiences including K-12 teachers and students, higher education teacher and students, and informal educators and audiences. SMD is committed to training the next generation of scientists and educating a scientifically literate population.  This commitment includes supporting undergraduate faculty teaching major and non-major courses. Resources for Higher Education: Based on feedback from higher-education faculty, the NASA SMD Forums support higher education efforts through coordinated literature review of relevant research, appraisal of instructors’ needs, coordination of audience-based NASA resources and opportunities, professional development at professional meetings, and classroom support materials.  Archived materials are available to all instructors online.  EarthSpace:  EarthSpace is a searchable database of undergraduate classroom materials for undergraduate faculty teaching Earth and space sciences at both the introductory and upper division levels. Modeled after the highly successful SERC clearinghouse for geosciences assets, EarthSpace was designed for easy submission of classroom assets from home- works and computer interactives to laboratories and lectures. All materials are reviewed before posting, and authors adhere to the Creative Commons NonCommercial Attribution (CC-BY NC 3.0). If authors wish, their EarthSpace materials are automatically cross-posted to other digital libraries and virtual higher education communities. In addition to classroom assets, EarthSpace provides news and information about educational research, funding opportunities, and ongoing efforts for undergraduate education.  EarthSpace can be accessed at http://www.lpi.usra.edu/earthspace. NASA Wavelength:  NASA Wavelength is a digital collection of Earth and space science resources for educators of all levels – from elementary to college, to out-of-school programs. The resources, developed through funding of the NASA Science Mission Directorate (SMD), have undergone a peer-review process through which educators and scientists ensure the content is accurate and useful in an educational setting. Resources can be located and connected to other websites using atom feeds and shared with others through social media and email. NASA Wavelength can be accessed at http://nasawavelength.org. Resource Guides for Teaching Astro 101:  In collaboration with Astronomy 101 instructors, the Astrophysics Forum has created resources guides for cosmology and exoplanets.  Each include background information, links to animations/simulations, classroom activities, and references on teaching each topic.  The guides can be accessed at http://www.astrosociety.org/education/astronomyresource-guides.  Professional Development Opportunities at Science Conferences: Each year, the Forums offer workshops at professional meetings (e.g. LPSC, DPS) for higher education faculty teaching undergraduate courses to share best practices in instruction, resources for teaching planetary science and astronomy topics, and other special topics such as the use of social media in the classroom.  Additional Information:  Do you currently bring – or are you interested in bringing - NASA science into your higher education efforts? Learn more and become involved at http://smdepo.org.  Contact Sanlyn Buxner (buxner@psi.edu) or Jen Grier (jgrier@psi.edu ) for more information.     2373.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
