  AUTOMATED DUNE FIELD MAPPING FROM CTX IMAGERY. Pedro T.K. Sarmento 1, David A. Vaz 1,2 , L.K. Fenton 3, M. T. Barata 1, T.I. Michaels 3, 1 Center for Geophysics, University of Coimbra, Observatório Astronómico da Universidade de Coimbra, Almas de Freire, 3040-004 Coimbra, Portugal (vaz.david@gmail.com), 2 CERENA, Instituto Superior Técnico, Av. Rovisco Pais, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal, 3 Carl Sagan Center, SETI Institute, 189 N Bernardo Ave, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.   Introduction:  Aeolian sediment transport directions are commonly derived from imagery by mapping dune slipfaces and by characterizing the associated degree of transport obliquity. This process generally implies drawing (on a GIS platform) a transport vector for each slipface or a line segment covering the extent of the slipface. The mapped features are then classified and segmented by trend and morphology. This type of dataset can be used to infer wind regimes and sediment transport characteristics, namely by the application of the inverse maximum gross bedform-normal transport method [1, 2].  This bedform mapping and categorization is sometimes difficult due to the large extent of the areas to be mapped and to the complexity of the dune patterns. The degree of reproducibility of the interpretations has also been questioned [3], which can make the standardization and comparison of results difficult. Our purpose is to develop and apply new tools that can help with this task, allowing automated mapping and characterization of dune field patterns from CTX imagery. We are trying to extend the same basic approach used to analyze small-scale aeolian features from HiRISE images [4]. However, the large diversity and complexity of the dune morphologies present a bigger challenge. Here we show some preliminary results that highlight the difficulties that we are facing, as well as the potential benefits that the methodology offers.   Data and methodologies:  A controlled CTX mosaic with a spatial resolution of 6 m/pixel was created using ISIS (Integrated Software for Imagers and Spectrometers). We focused on the analysis of a small portion of the dune fields which are located in the floor of Gale crater. This is an area characterized by a complex wind regime responsible for a large diversity of dune morphologies [5] which are currently active [6].  As a first step, a rough mapping region-of-interest is defined. This is done to reduce the processing time for large mosaics, and at this point it is more convenient to do it manually, although automated alternatives to delineate the outlines of dune fields have been proposed [7].  The segmentation of all the linear regions/structures is performed using the same type of approach that was used in [4]. The mapped features are then vectorized and characterized using the same procedure described in [8]. What we obtain is a collection of objects (Fig. 1) and attributes which integrate geometric and textural characteristics computed from the image mosaic.   Figure 1 - Features mapped from the Gale crater CTX mosaic (left). The supervised classification allows the segmentation of the objects that correspond to dune morphologies, which then enables these objects and their geometric and textural attributes to be used to characterize the dune fields.   The algorithm extracts all the linear features (besides slipfaces we also have dune crests, dune flanks, bedrock structures, etc.), so the next step of the methodology is the segmentation of the lines that correspond to dune morphologies. To accomplish that we apply a supervised classification scheme using neural networks, obtaining a segmentation accuracy of ~90% (see Fig. 1 for a view of the final results).  Results and discussion:  The resultant dataset accurately marks and characterizes the linear regions that have stronger albedo variations. These areas correspond to bedform morphological discontinuities such as dune flanks, slipfaces or crests. However, this type of output is very different from traditional slipface mapping, which is specifically aimed to assess net transport trends. Even so, the mapped features can still be useful for the spatial characterization of the dune patterns. Figure 2 shows the comparison between the time-averaged wind vectors from the Mars Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (MRAMS) [9, 10] and the mean azimuths computed locally from the mapped structures. The MRAMS output shows winds preferentially blowing from the NNE quadrant. That direction agrees with the average azimuths for the eastern half of the mapped area, indicating that longitudinal transport/bedforms exist there. The western border of the dune field is constituted by barchans and barchanoid dunes, and in that region the average bedform axis trend is NW-SE, matching the direction of net sediment transport which can be inferred from the barchan slipfaces.   Besides this simple trend assessment enabled by the automated mapping technique, we are currently trying to extract and predict other parameters from the mapped features such as: 1) morphological classification of the dune types; 2) the prediction of the sediment transport directions and its dispersion in the dune field and 3) transport ratios between the predicted wind directions. Conclusion:  The mapping and object-based characterization of the several morphological elements that form dune fields is just an initial step. By further exploring the analysis and modeling of the mapped features, we expect to derive automatically other parameters which are important for the characterization of dune fields and their formative wind regimes on Mars. THEMIS mosaics allowed the global survey of Martian dunes and the compilation of the Mars Global Digital Dune Database [11, 12]. Since the spatial coverage of CTX imagery is expanding, a higher resolution characterization of dune fields on Mars will soon be possible. By allowing a fast and objective characterization of the dune patterns, the tools that we are developing can potentially contribute to the revision and expansion of this database.     Figure 2 - Local average trends derived from the mapped dune morphologies (see Fig. 1). Compare with the MRAMS time-averaged wind vectors.  References:  [1] Fenton L. K., et al. (2013) Icarus, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2013.04.001. [2] Fenton L. K., et al. (2013) Icarus, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2013.07.0. [3] Hugenholtz C. H., et al. (2012) Earth-Sci Rev, 111, 319-334. [4] Vaz D. A. and S. Silvestro (2013) Icarus, In press. [5] Hobbs S. W., et al. (2010) Icarus, 210, 102-115. [6] Silvestro S., et al. (2013) Geology, 41, 483-486. [7] Bandeira L., et al. (2011) Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, IEEE, 8, 626-630. [8] Vaz D. A. (2011) Planet. Space Sci., 59, 1210-1221. [9] Michaels T. I. and S. C. R. Rafkin (2008) J Geophys Res-Planet, 113, E00a07. [10] Rafkin S. C. R., et al. (2001) Icarus, 151, 228-256. [11] Hayward R. K., et al. (2013) Icarus, In press. [12] Hayward R. K., et al. (2007) Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 112, E11007.  Acknowledgements:  This work was supported by FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia) with the grant FRH/BPD/72371/2010 and the contracts PEst-OE/CTE/UI0611/2012-CGUC and PTDC/CTESPA/117786/2010. 