2430.PDF
USING POROUS MATERIAL TO SIMULATE ASTEROID DISRUPTION.  S. J. Jack1, M. M. Strait1, G. J. Flynn2, and D. D. Durda3 1Dept. Of Chemistry, Alma College, 614 W. Superior St., Alma MI 48801 (jack1sj@alma.edu), 2Dept. Of Physics, State University of New York-Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh NY 12901, 3Southwest Research Institute, 1050 Walnut Street Suite 3400, Boulder CO 80302.   Introduction:  In space, asteroids are constantly colliding and disrupting, forming meteorites. Some of these are on a route to Earth. A way to change this route is needed in order to reduce the damage done to the Earth. By studying the disruption of meteorites, an idea of how to deflect them, either by disrupting them more or redirecting the route, can be established [1].  We have been studying materials of different compositions to investigate differences in disruption patterns at the NASA Ames Vertical Gun Range for a number of years. We have found that different materials disrupt in different ways [2].  Meteorites are made of many different materials and it is difficult to replicate these compositions and disrupting actual meteorites is not always an option due to their rarity. We have been using terrestrial analogs to study physical properties of rocks and in this study the characteristic being investigated is the porosity of the rock [3]. One physical characteristic of asteroids seems to be a high porosity, so we are investigating the disruption characteristics of a high porosity material. A good terrestrial test rock for porosity is pumice—it is inexpensive and easy to acquire. The pumice is disrupted and the distribution of particles is analyzed to help further the understanding of meteorite impacts [4, 5]. Experimental Details:  Disruption of the samples takes place at the NASA Ames Vertical Gun Range in California. In the gun chamber, foils of various thicknesses are placed around the rock suspended in the center (Figure 1). The rock is impacted with an eighth- or quarter-inch aluminum sphere with speeds of about 5 km/sec—the speed of material in space. This disrupts the rock and causes particles to fly and pierce the surrounding foils. A sheet also covers the floor so all of the particles can be collected for analysis.  In the lab, the foils are mounted onto slides and scanned into a computer using a Prime Film 7250 Pro3 scanner and Cyber View X. The image is then analyzed in ImageJ where all the holes are counted and measured. The particles from the floor are put through an eight-level sieve to sort them by size. All the particles in the > 4.00 mm range and > 2.00 mm range are massed, ten to twenty particles are massed in the >1.00 mm range and > 0.5 mm range.  In the last four levels all the particles of the same size range are massed together. Both sets of data are imported into an Excel® spreadsheet and a graph is produced.  Results:  There are two distinct types of graph produced. One has a smooth "S" shaped curve—high on the left, flat in the middle and, low on the right. This is customary of a typical meteorite disruption (Figure 2). The second graph has the same "S" shape but with a gap in the flat area (Figure 3). This means there were no particles of that size formed in the disruption. In previous shots of low porosity material, the rock completely shattered resulting in a continuous particle distribution between 7.1x10-14 g and 0.03 g. In the pumice shots, the rock would either break into several large pieces or form a crater with no disruption.  This resulted in particles between 0.0001 g and 100 g and then dust, as small as 1x10-11 g, with a gap between 0.0001 g and 1.0 x 10-9 g. There were a total of twenty shots done on pumice with various masses impacted with various projectile mass and speed. The majority of the graphs produce a gap. This suggests that if an asteroid is made of highly porous material, disrupting it more could cause it to break into large pieces or to crater, not really fixing the problem of asteroids and meteorites crashing into the earth and causing damage.  Future Work:  With all of the shot data is analyzed, the velocity of the projectile, mass of the projectile, and mass of the rock will be looked at to see if there is any correlation between them and whether the rock disrupted or cratered. Also the gap size will be looked at and compared to the correlation determined earlier. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NASA Planetary Geology and Geophysics Program Project Number NNX11AP22G. Support was also provided by the National Science Foundation via the PRISM grant to Alma College. Additional support is provided by Alma College. References: [1] Flynn G. J. et al. (2014) LPS XLV, Abstract. [2] Flynn G. J. et al. (2009) Planetary and Space Science, 57, 119-126. [3] Durda D. D. and Flynn G. J. (1999) Icarus, 142, 46-55. [4] Flynn G. J. et al. (1999) Icarus, 142, 97-105. [5] Durda D. D. et al. (2005) Workshop on Dust in Planetary Systems, 77-80.  2430.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 1: The set up inside the gun chamber at the AGVR.  The foil detectors are in the upper right. The rock sample is hanging in the lower left. The drapery is the sheet covering the surfaces used to collect the particles.   Figure 2: A typical meteorite graph with a smooth curve.   Figure 3: A pumice disruption graph with a  gap in the middle. This is characteristic of the pumice disruptions.  2430.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
