 REVISED CRISM SPECTRAL PARAMETERS AND SUMMARY PRODUCTS.  C. E. Viviano-Beck1, F. P. Seelos1, S. L. Murchie1, E. G. Kahn1, K. D. Seelos1, H. Taylor1, K. Taylor2, B. L. Ehlmann3,4, S. M. Wisemann5, J. F. Mustard5, and M. F. Morgan1, 1The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD <Christina.Beck@jhuapl.edu>, 2Corning Inc., Corning, NY, 3California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 4Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, 5Brown University, Providence, RI.  Introduction:  Hyperspectral visible/near-infrared reflectance data from MRO CRISM [1] and MEX OMEGA [2] continue to reveal an increasingly diverse suite of minerals present on the Martian surface.  A technique using spectral parameters derived from reflectances at key wavelengths compactly represent spatial variations in mineralogy as "summary products" and was developed using OMEGA data.  We report an update to the traditional suite of summary products that captures the currently known spectral diversity on the surface of Mars.  These revised 49 summary products utilize both multispectral and hyperspectral wavelength sampling, while reducing illumination artifacts, false-positives, and ambiguous detections.  While some of the products are adapted from the original OMEGA summary products [3], we also present newly derived parameters that highlight locations of recently discovered spectral signatures.  We have compiled a diversity of minerals currently identified by CRISM into a spectral library of type areas, which along with laboratory reflectance spectra are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the summary products. Our analysis indicates that these products capture the known spectral diversity defined by OMEGA and CRISM at visible/near-infrared wavelengths, and successfully highlight and differentiate between locations with variable spectral signatures.   The MICA Library:  We have assembled 30 unique type spectra of minerals identified using CRISM data into the Minerals Identified through CRISM Analysis (MICA) Library.  These type spectra are derived from published results of several recent investigations of surface mineralogy using CRISM data.  The type spectra are used to "tune" existing CRISM spectral parameter definitions in [3] taking advantage of the full hyperspectral resolution of CRISM data, and augment the summary products catalog to include minerals not known from OMEGA data.  The MICA library includes Mars surface spectra dominated by iron oxides, pyroxenes (low- and highcalcium), olivine, plagioclase, ices (CO2 and water), mono- and poly-hydrated sulfates (e.g., kieserite, jarosite, bassanite, gypsum, and alunite), zeolite, Alphyllosilicates (including Al-smectite and kaolinite), Fe/Mg-phyllosilicates (including Fe-smectite, Mgsmectite, talc-bearing material, chlorite, and prehnite), carbonate (Mg- and Fe/Ca- dominated), serpentine, hydrated silica, and chlorides.  The signatures in the MICA Library are plotted aside comparable laboratory spectra in Figure 1.  Figure 1.  The MICA type spectra library (right) and laboratory analog materials (left).   Table 1.  Example revisions to the existing CRISM spectral parameter formulations (previous version [1] in gray).    Revised CRISM Spectral Parameters:  Parameterizing CRISM spectral data has proven to be a highly successful method of condensing spectral information within a scene to a reduced number of dimensions.  The original suite of CRISM summary products [3] have been incorporated into standard CRISM processing and are an effective tool for rapid assessment of an information-rich dataset.  Here we present examples of the revisions of mafic parameters, OLINDEX2 [4], LCPINDEX, and HCPINDEX, for illustrative purposes.  The revisions to their formulations and new naming conventions are presented in Table 1.  A slight change has been made to OLINDEX2 to utilize more channels between 1080 and 1470 nm.  The formulas for the pyroxene indices LCPINDEX and HCPINDEX are substantially altered.  The old formulation for these parameters were written to identify convexity at the region between the ~1- and ~2-µm pyroxene absorptions (at 1330 nm for LCP and 1470 nm for HCP).  The revised LCPINDEX2 and HCPINDEX2 are sensitive to the broad 2-µm pyroxene absorption, and are less subject to false-positives from other spectral endmembers or mixtures that display convexity between ~1.3-1.5 µm.  This is illustrated in Figure 2, where an RGB combination of three summary products is displayed for both the original and revised parameters.  Extracted spectra demonstrates locations where HCPINDEX2 correctly indicates the presence of highcalcium pyroxene, where the original HCPINDEX shows no significant detection.   Summary Product Sensitivity:  Summary products may be non-unique and provide large values for multiple mineral phases, or in data with unusual spectral anomalies.  Figure 3 provides a visual representation of the sensitivity of an extended set of revised summary products, where each formulation has been applied to the MICA type spectra.  The library has been ordered similarly to Figure 1, where the diagnostic absorption features shift to longer wavelengths in each subsequent row. Figure 3 demonstrates the sensitivity of the revised set of parameters across the range of known spectral diversity on Mars. Conclusions:  Because the original CRISM summary products were based on a priori expectations of surface compositions from OMEGA data, new summary products are needed to reflect the increasingly complex diversity of minerals on the surface.  The expanded parameter set exploits the hyperspectral characteristics of the CRISM targeted observation dataset and provides a more robust and comprehensive set of parameters.  Because the revised summary products are tailored to the currently known suite of minerals, they are more representative of the diversity of the surface than the older set.  The products provide a useful tool for scientific interpretation and assessment of future candidate landing sites for in situ investigations. References: [1] Bibring et al. (2005) Science, 307, 15761581. [2] Murchie et al. (2007) JGR, 112, E05S03. [3] Pelkey et al. (2007) JGR, 112, E08S14. [4] Salvatore et  Figure 2.  CRISM scene FRT000064D9 (left) false color, (center) old mafic summary products, (right) new mafic summary products.  CRISM spectra (far right) from a particular location (white circle) and comparable laboratory spectra (RELAB) of high-Ca pyroxene (HCP) material.  Figure 3.  Summary product sensitivity matrix for CRISM MICA library.  Each parameter (column) is linearly scaled and has a fixed lower stretch limit of zero (black indicates a band depth below zero) and an upper limit of the highest response of the distribution (white).     