 REMOTE RAMAN & LIBS SPECTROSCOPY FOR FUTURE MARS ROVER MISSIONS. S.M. Clegg1, R.C. Wiens1, S. Maurice2, O. Gasnault2, S.K. Sharma3, A.K. Misra3, R. Newell1, S. Bender1, O. Forni2, J. Lasue2, M.D. Dyar4, and K.L.Nowak-Lovato1, 1Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, sclegg@lanl.gov, 2Institut de Recherches en Astrophysique et Planétologie, Toulouse, France, 3Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai'i at Manoa, 4Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley.   Introduction: Remote Raman and Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) are highly synergistic analytical techniques well suited for future planetary missions. Raman spectroscopy is sensitive to the molecular structure of the sample from which one can definitively determine mineralogy and infer the elemental composition.  LIBS is sensitive to the elemental composition from which geochemistry is definitively determined and mineralogy is inferred. Wiens et al. [1] and Sharma et al. [2] demonstrated that these two complementary analytical techniques can be integrated into a single instrument suitable for planetary exploration. An integrated instrument based on the ChemCam architecture could be used as a reconnaissance tool for other contact instruments as well as a primary science instrument capable of quantitative mineralogical and geochemical analysis. Both techniques involve focusing a laser onto the surface of the sample from several hundred microns to several millimeters enabling remote micro-scale geological investigations. Integration of these two techniques into the same instrument ensures that the same sample is probed by both techniques. Finally, an integrated Raman & LIBS instrument meets most of the Mars 2020 mission goals including context mineralogy, fine scale imaging, fine scale imaging, fine scale elemental composition and organic detection while the inclusion of a remote micro-imager (RMI) such as that on ChemCam would satisfy the context imaging requirement.[3] Experimental: LIBS experiments involve focusing a Nd:YAG laser (1064nm, 10Hz, 60mJ/pulse) onto a sample surface. The laser ablates material from the surface, generating an expanding plasma containing electronically excited atoms, ions and small molecules.  The excited species emit light at wavelengths diagnostic of the species present in the sample as they relax to lower electronic states. Some of this emission was collected with an 89 mm telescope and directed into the ChemCam replica in the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) LIBS User Facility.   The Raman experiments involve directing the pulsed, doubled Nd:YAG laser (532 nm, 10Hz, 10 mJ/pulse) onto the sample surface. The laser stimulates the Raman-active vibrational modes in the sample, producing the Raman emission. Some of this emission is collected with the same 89 mm telescope and directed into a homebuilt miniature transmission spectrometer and recorded with an intensified charge couple device (ICCD). This transmission spectrometer was specifically designed to collect both the Raman signals to 4200 cm-1 (685.1 nm) as well as record the LIBS signals out to 840 nm. Samples: A broad suite of pure minerals and mixed minerals within a basalt matrix were analyzed out to 12 m by Raman and 5 meters by LIBS.  The samples were placed in a vacuum chamber filled with 7 Torr CO2 to simulate the Martian surface pressure.  The pure mineral samples included aragonite (CaCO3), Figure 1: LIBS spectra of barite (red) and dolomite (black) collected with a 5m standoff distance.  Nearly all of the peaks in the barite spectrum are associated with barium elemental emission lines.  The weak sulfur lines from the barium sample are depicted in the inset.  Most of the peaks in the dolomite spectrum represent Mg and  barite (BaSO4), calcite (CaCO3), dolomite (CaMg(CO3)2), gypsum (CaSO4.2H2O), jarosite (KFe3+3(SO4)2(OH)6), olivine ((Mg,Fe)2SiO4), quartz (SiO2), and talc (Mg3Si4O10(OH)2). The mixed mineral samples included various amounts of andalusite (Al2SiO5), anhydrite (CaSO4), calcite (CaCO3), chlorapatite (Ca5(PO4)3Cl), diopside (CaMgSi2O6), forsterite (Mg2SiO4), labradorite ((Ca,Na)(Si,Al)4O8), α-quartz (SiO2), tremolite (Ca2Mg5(Si8O22)(OH)2). Discussion: The LIBS spectra depicted in Figure 1 are relatively simple to interpret.  The barite sample is pristine as most of the elemental emission lines are from electronically excited Ba.  The weak sulfur lines are clearly observed although their transition probabilities are smaller than those for Ba suggesting that the sample is indeed barium sulfate rather than barium oxide.[4] Some trace amounts of Mg, Na and K are also observed in the barite LIBS spectrum. The barite Raman spectrum further proves the mineralogical identity on the basis of the pattern of diagnostic peaks. The LIBS spectrum of dolomite contains more elemental peaks including large Mg and Ca peaks as expected, as well as trace amounts of Si, Na, and K. The presence of the carbon peaks and the ratios of the cations suggest that the sample is dolomite as confirmed by the Raman spectrum.  The LIBS calibration database developed for the ChemCam instrument will be used to extract quantitative elemental compositions and compared against chemical analyses of the end-members from the samples listed above. The Partial Least Squares (PLS1) algorithms developed to analyze ChemCam data collected from the Curiosity rover will be used to analyze these data.[4 - 6] MVA classification tools such as Independent Components Analysis (ICA) and Principal Components Analysis (PCA) can be used with the combined Raman-LIBS to both quantify the chemistry of the sample and classify its mineralogy.[6, 7] Conclusion: An integrated Raman and LIBS instrument operating from the mast of a rover has the capability of remotely probing samples as either a reconnaissance tool as well as a primary science instrument capable of quantitative mineralogical and geochemical analysis. The use of a focused laser enables microscale geochemical analysis as well as produce brighter signatures relative to passive techniques. The LIBS laser can remotely remove dust from surfaces revealing hidden geological or astrobiological features. Finally, the combined Raman-LIBS instrument shows great potential for use in exploration of other planetary bodies such as Venus, Titan, and the Moon. References: [1] Wiens R. C., et al. (2005) Spectrochim. Acta A 61, 2324-2334. [2] Sharma, S. K. et al. (2007) Spectrochim. Acta A, 68, 1036-1045 (2007). [3] Mustard et al. (2013) http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/mars2020/. [4] Dyar M.D. et al. (2011) Spectrochim Acta B, 66, 39-56. [5]Wiens et al. (2013) Spectrochim Acta B, 82, 1. [6] Clegg et al. (2009) Spectrochim. Acta, B, 64, 79. [7] Forni et al. (2013) Spectrochim. Acta B 86 31.  Figure 2: Raman spectra from barite (left) and dolomite (right) collected with a 12 m standoff distance. Each spectrum includes several diagnostic peaks that are used to uniquely identify the mineral. 