2464.PDF
OSIRIS-REx LAUNCHES 321SCIENCE - ENGAGING THE PUBLIC IN SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING THROUGH YOUTUBE VIDEOS.  A. H. Spitz1, M. Dykhuis1, S. Platts1, J. T. Keane1, H. Roper1, Z. Bentley2, R. Pachell3, S.E. Spitz3, and D. S. Lauretta1. 1University of Arizona, Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, Tucson, AZ, USA, aspitz@lpl.arizona.edu, 2Exogeologyrocks.com, 3Catalina Foothills High School, Tucson, AZ, USA.   Introduction:  NASA's OSIRIS-REx Asteroid Sample Return Mission's Communication and Public Engagement (CPE) program launched OSIRIS-REx Presents 321Science, a series of short videos, on YouTube in December 2013 (youtube.com/osirisrex). A multi-disciplinary team of communicators, film and graphic arts students, teens, scientists, and engineers produces one video per month on science and engineering topics related to the OSIRIS-REx mission. The format is designed to engage all members of the public, but especially younger audiences, serve as a resource for team members and others, and convey science and engineering of the mission in succinct, relevant, and captivating ways which complement more traditional formats such as formal video interviews, mission animations, and hands-on activities. In creating this new focus of OSIRIS-REx engagement, we developed 321Science as an umbrella program to encourage expansion of the concept and topics beyond the OSIRIS-REx mission through partnerships. Such an expansion strengthens and magnifies the reach of the OSIRIS-REx efforts. 321Science Program: OSIRIS-REx passed its confirmation review on May 15, 2013. As part of this process the mission's education and public outreach budget was reduced and the focus changed to Communication and Public Engagement. This change provided an opportunity to engage the public with the mission in new ways. In investigating creative solutions for communicating the science and engineering of the mission, CPE personnel researched methods that make use of new technologies and formats to reach wide audiences, appeal to broad constituencies within the general public, and require modest resources. 321Science offers a core solution to provide content easily, thoroughly, and widely. Initially 321Science is focusing on production of short, fast-draw videos, each of which explains a concept related to science and engineering.  YouTube science. CPE investigated how science is presented on YouTube, which reaches more than 1 billion viewers per month [1]. Some of the major YouTube science channels are Minute Physics, AsapScience, Veritasium, and SciShow. These channels have multiple videos, address a variety of science topics, and use various formats including fast-draw, interviews, and demonstrations.  The combination of interesting questions, focused topics, short duration, easily understandable and relevant explanations, good science, and humor produce engaging videos and have created huge followings with millions of views for individual videos. Individual viewers watch these videos, often multiple times, speakers use them in presentations, and teachers assign viewing to students. While younger audiences (teens and young adults) form the primary demographic, these videos are attractive enough to engage a wide range of ages. They deliver accurate, engaging science to millions of viewers in a variety of settings. They allow individuals, communicators, and teachers easy access to science and engineering topics that align with their needs and interests. Team structure. The multidisciplinary 321Science team consists of OSIRIS-REx communicators, University of Arizona (UA) Lunar and Planetary Laboratory (LPL) graduate students, UA student videographers and graphic artists, high school students, and OSIRISREx scientists and engineers. Membership of the team varies based on the topic (i.e., 321Science recruits OSIRIS-REx scientists with expertise in specific areas for specific videos), student availability, and other factors. The team also creates videos with input and advice from external public and education reviewers to achieve broad audience applicability, interest, and use. Creating videos. The 321Science team developed a prototype video in the summer of 2013 to demonstrate the concept of short, fast-draw videos to the OSIRISREx Principal Investigator (PI), Science Team, and other team members. Once established, 321Science prepared a schedule of video topics and identified which Science Team (and engineering) members to engage on specific topics. For all subsequent videos, the core production team (writer/researcher, videographer, artists, audience representatives, producer/director) prepares a script, including detailed narra321Science team developed a logo for the series. 2464.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
tion and visual direction, creates a storyboard, checks the science/engineering with team members, submits it for review to the OSIRIS-REx PI and prepares props and plans for filming. After filming, the videographer edits the visuals and adds animations as needed, the narrator records, and the videographer prepares a rough cut for review. 321Science core team, scientists, management, and target audience members review the rough cut. After review and any needed revisions, we post the final cut on the mission's YouTube channel, youtube.com/osirisrex.  321Science has a detailed proposed schedule of video production through launch in 2016. Production plans are categorized to coincide with the course of the mission beginning with Learning the basics - about asteroids and the mission - and proceeding to Building the spacecraft, Run up to launch, Cruising to Bennu, Run up to rendezvous, Mapping Bennu, Sampling, Analyzing data, Cruising home and Returning and analyzing the sample. Video production also takes into account external events to leverage attention to our videos. Production will retain flexibility to be responsive to audience interests and needs and developments in the mission, science, and external events.  The inaugural video in December 2013 was Asteroids: Fact v Fiction, followed by What is OSIRIS-REx? in January 2014, and What is the Yarkovsky Effect? in February 2014. Links between videos are noted and "sub-videos" are created to highlight particular concepts, e.g., What is thermal inertia? and What is prograde/retrograde motion? are links from What is the Yarkovsky Effect? Reach of 321Science.  Anyone with access to YouTube can view these videos. While created for the general public, OSIRIS-REx does not control the audience; we allow anyone to use the videos for their purposes including teaching science, technology, engineering, and mathematics to formal and informal education audiences.  Team members can also use these videos for communication with the science community, engagement with the public, and for formal and informal education use. Creating short, focused content produces a flexible and multi-purpose product. Creating entertaining content and presentation encourages use for broad audiences, engaging greater numbers in the mission, science, engineering, and exploration. OSIRIS-REx Partnerships: Creation of 321Science videos is a team effort involving partnerships across disciplines both within the OSIRIS-REx mission and externally. CPE is a working group within the OSIRIS-REx Science Team and the 321Science core team draws from this working group. The 321Science team works closely with Science Team members when developing scripts and visualizations for the videos to ensure accuracy of science and engineering concepts. 321Science core team members are scientists with educational and artistic experience, well-versed in translating the detailed, hard science details, which science and engineering colleagues present to one another, to broader audiences. Also critical to the success of this product are partnerships with target audience members who provide input on content, presentation, and marketing. Finally, to achieve notice in a crowded arena, the 321Science team forges relationships with colleagues, existing networks, and other video producers to build the audience for our product. Future Development:  OSIRIS-REx Presents 321Science will continue to publish approximately one video per month at least through 2016 with continuous evaluation of topics and schedule. We expect most videos to use the fast-draw format but different topics may work better in other formats. We will continue to evaluate the success of videos using YouTube statistics and internally established analytics. OSIRIS-REx is also establishing partnerships with colleagues interested in expanding the 321Science video franchise. For example, LPL graduate students interested in Solar System research intend to work with OSIRIS-REx's 321Science team to promote fast-draw videos highlighting research about other Solar System bodies. The University of Arizona pursues copyright and licensing opportunities; OSIRIS-REx and 321Science are registered trademarks of the Arizona Board of Regents. OSIRIS-REx will also expand efforts to affiliate with the YouTube science community, "Science YouTubers," in order to expand audiences, connect to broader topics, and promote different formats for engaging the public in science and the OSIRIS-REx mission.  References: [1] YouTube (2014) Statistics, Viewership. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.     2464.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
