 GLACIAL ALPINE EROSION IN ARGYRE, MARS: A LUNAR CONTRAST AND TERRESTRIAL SIMILARITY.  J.S. Kargel1 1Department of Hydrology and Water Resources, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA (kargel@hwr.arizona.edu).  Introduction/Summary: The Argyre impact basin appears to have undergone a long history of glacial erosion and deposition.  Unlike some currently and previously glaciated landscapes on Mars, warm-based glaciers appear to be required to produce the observed landscapes of Argyre.  The basin's rim mountains appear to have been deeply eroded by wet-based glaciers, and the central basin depression has been deeply infilled by glacial, glaciofluvial, and glaciolacustrine deposits and modified by post-glacial eolian and periglacial processes.  I compare Argyre with the lunar Orientale basin to highlight Argyre's modification.   Figure 1. Argyre (A) and Orientale (B) basins. (C) Profiles used for analysis shown in Figure 2. Background.  Zoomed out, Argyre and Orientale's topography resemble each other (Fig.1).  The basins are structurally similar multiringed impact basins, they have each been subjected to roughly similar impact histories following basin formation, and both have been partly infilled, Orientale by volcanism, Argyre by surface-driven processes.     Kargel and Strom (1990, 1992) interpreted Argyre's landscape to have been formed by glacial erosion and glacial and glacio-lacustrine infilling of the basin.  Baker et al. (1991), Hiesinger & Head (2002), Head & Pratt (2001), and Dohm & Kargel (2012) have incorporated this interpretation, or a variant, into broader regional and global hydrological models of Mars, whereas Parker et al. (2003) and Clifford & Parker (2001) have also produced global hydrological models but emphasized evidence for deep liquid water inundation of Argyre. Kargel (2004) and Banks et al. (2008, 2009) added new evidence for glacial activity. Unresolved questions remain, e.g., the duration of glaciation; the roles of glaciation relative to marine, eolian and periglacial activity; and the climate implications.   New evidence. Many geomorphometric parameters reveal fundamental differences between Argyre's eroded mountains and the ring mountains of Orientale basin on the moon.  Conversely, Argyre and terrestrial glaciated mountains have many features in common. I take an example of the differences between Argyre and Orientale from the profile lines shown in Figure 1.  Virtually any profile lines drawn across these basins show much the same thing, but the two profile lines were selected to avoid large superposed impact craters.   At the scales shown in Figure 1, the influences of glaciation do not clearly distinguish the two basins; there has been more infilling of Argyre, but the topography at the scales shown in Figure 1 does not betray the causes of infilling or the causes of erosion.   With almost any detail greater than shown in Figure 1, the two basins become very distinct in terms of the geomorphology of the rim mountains and infill deposits.  In the case of mountain geomorphology, the profound differences in form are indicated in Figure 2 for a single transect across each basin.  Orientale has primarily faceted tectonic massifs having steep slopes and low surface curvature, whereas Argyre has primarily concave-up curved surfaces representing U-shapped valleys and cirques eroded into the impact tectonic massifs.  Figure 3 shows an example of a U-shaped valley. Discussion and conclusions. The topographic structure of Argyre's rim mountains is unlike Orientale  Figure 2. Statistical comparison of topographic profiles across Orientale (not glacially modified) and Argyre (glacially modified) impact basins.  basin's but similar to Earth's glacially sculpted mountains (not shown in the figures). Such mountain forms are generally regarded as a chief and diagnostic hallmark of wet-based glacial erosion of mountainous terrain. Assessed from the huge scale of U-shaped valleys and other apparent glacier-sculpted forms in Argyre the imprint of glaciation there is comparable to that of Earth's glacially imprinted mountainous terrain.  Evidence thus points to one or more protracted periods of wet-based glacial erosion in Argyre. Glaciers once locally exceeded 2000 m thick.   Argyre has abundant, diverse signs of glacial meltwater activity but few features indicating areally widely distributed runoff from rainfall or snow melt. Though the evidence is not highlighted here, it appears that Argyre at times hosted large lakes—possibly frozen at the surface for much or all of the year—and enormous subglacial rivers.  The collective evidence appears increasingly consistent with the union set of most major prior interpretations of Argyre.  Unresolved is the timing and integration of processes. These observations constrain Argyre's prevailing climate during peak glacial erosion. Geologically lengthy, cold, snowy episodes may have driven accumulation of polythermal glaciers. These periods may have been followed by briefer periglacial/arid-climate episodes when the glaciers ablated due to warm summers. Modern Ellesmere Island, northern Greenland, and the Antarctic Peninsula may provide adequate (terrestrial alpine analogs.  These analog landscapes required millions of years of glaciation—and very little rainfall runoff—to achieve a geomorphological imprint similar to that of Argyre.   Figure 3. THEMIS mosaic of the area of glacial features highlighted by Banks etal. (2008).  Inset shows MOLA profiles (each drawn from multiple PEDRs) across a typical U-shaped valley in Argyre. 