 UPPER JURASSIC MICROMETEORITES FROM CAÑADON ASFALTO FM., PATAGONIA, ARGENTINA.  M. Matteini1, N. Hauser1, N.Cabaleri2, F. A. Cuadro1, T. Magaldi1 and L. A. Pereira1, 1 Institute of Geosciences, University of Brasilia, Campus D. Ribeiro, Brasilia, Brazil (massimo@unb.br ) 2INGEIS, University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.   Introduction: The Cañadón Asfalto Formation of central Patagonia (Argentina) represents a pull-apart basin formed during the Upper Jurassic (ToarcianAalenian to Tithonian) in response to a generalized extensional tectonics associated to the break-up of Gondwana. Due to its fossil records and its potential oil resources, the Cañadón Asfalto Fm. has a relevant scientific and economic significance. This unit that outcrops along the middle Chubut river valley transitionally overlies the volcanic rocks of the middle Jurassic Lonco Trapial Formation and it is uncomformably overimposed by the Cretaceous Calcareo Formation. It is composed by Las Chacritas and Puesto Almada Members. The first is characterized by lacustrine carbonatic and siliciclastic facies associations, interfingering with occasional volcanic deposits. The carbonatic facies/microfacies are represented by mudstones, wackstones, packstones, grainstones and microbialitic limestones indicating littoral/marginal and palustrine environments (Cabaleri et al., 2013). During the separation procedure for detrital zircon study by U-Pb datings of a sediment from the Cañadon Asfalto Fm., several magnetic microspherules (micrometorites) have been fortuitously recognized After that a new aliquot of the same sample has been taken and studied specifically for the characterization of the micrometeorites.  Methodology: A sample(~1,1 Kg of weight) representative of  a fine lacustrine deposit from the Cañadon Asfalto Fm. (Chubut, Argentina) has been fragmented taking care to avoid any kind of contamination. The magnetic particles were separated from a fraction between 125 and 300 μm using a hand magnet.  The spherules were identified under binocular microscope, picked and mounted on adhesive tape. The external morphology of spherules were studied with Secondary Electron  (SE) images using a JEOL Electron microprobe at the Institute of Geosciences (IG) of the University of Brasilia (UnB), Brazil. Successively the spherules were inglobated in a resin and polished to expose a section for Backscattered Electron (BSE) study using a QUANTA Scanning Electron Microscope at IG (UnB). On polished spherules, electron microprobe analyses with 10 μm diameter spot were executed to study the geochemical composition.   Samples and results: A total of 125 microspherules from one sample of Las Chacritas Member have been analyzed. Three group of spherules were be recognized: i) spherical with surface formed by dendritic magnetite (Fig. 1 a-b); ii) spherical with smooth surface formed by interlocked magnetite crystals (Fig. 1 c-d), iii) dome-like shape spherules with smooth surface formed by fine dendritic magnetite (Fig. 1 e-f). The internal structures presented by the three groups are quite similar showing textural variation from a interlocked magnetite (Fig. 2a-b) to dendritic magnetite in a glass matrix (Fig. 2 c-d). Most of the spherules present one or more sub-spherical voids. All spherules have high Fe, minor Si and Al and relatively high Cr content (up to 1%).  Discussion and conclusions:  Micrometeorites in ancient sedimentary rocks, as reported by several Figure 1: Secondary electron images showing threee different groups of spherules (see text for explanation). a b ce f d authors, are of great interest for the historical record  of ancient micrometeorite population [5,6].  In this study we found only spherules that resemble particles known as 'melted micrometeorite'. Three main groups of melted micrometeorites have been recognized by several authors [2,3,4]: I-type, G-type and S-type. I-type are characterized by interlocked magnetite with interstitial wustite and represent ~1-2 % of micrometorites from South Pole Water Well [2]. They often present sub-spherical voids probably formed by loss of a molten metal (Fe-Ni) blead. Gtype spherules are typically characterized by a dominant dendritic magnetite within a mesostasis of silicate glass  and represent ~1 of micrometorites from South Pole Water Well [2]. They often present, as Itype spherules, sub-spherical voids. S-type spherules represent stony micrometeorite mostly composed by olivine, magnetite and glass. The mayority of the studied spherules show mineralogical, geochemical and textural features very similar to those reported for I-type micrometeorites whereas some spherules are interpreted as typical Gtype micrometeorites. Further researches are necessary to characterize these micrometeorites and better understand the accretion rate of micrometeorites during upper Jurassic, from the sedimentary recorde of Cañadon Asfalto Fm.     References:  [1] Cabaleri et al., 2013 Sedimentary Geology., 296, 103-121. [2] Taylor, S. and Brownlee, D. E., 1991 Meteoritics 26, 203-211. [3] Taylor, S. et al. (2000) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 35, 651-666. [4] Genge et al. 2008 Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 43, 497-515. [5] Onaue et al. 2011 Geology 39, 567-570. [6] Dredge et al. 2010 Scottish Journal of Geology 46, 7-16.   a b c d Figure 2: Back-scattered  electron images showing the variation of different internal structures from interlocked magnetite (a-b) to dendritic magnetite in a mesostasis of glass (c-d) 