2498.PDF
MORPHOMETRIC AND  RHEOLOGIC STUDY OF  LUNAR DOMES  USING CHANDRAYAAN-1 AND RECENT DATA SETS: A CASE STUDY FROM MARIUS HILLS REGION. A.S. Arya1, R.P. Rajasekhar1, Koyel Sur1, Prakash Chauhan1, B. Gopala Krishna1, Asheesh D. Pandey2, Anil khare2, P.K. Verma2, Ajai1, A.S. Kiran Kumar1, Space Applications centre (ISRO), Ahmedabad, 2RSAC, MP Council of Science and Technology, Bhopal, India, (arya_as@sac.isro.gov.in)  Introduction:  Domes, an analogue of the terrestrial shield volcanoes are one of the important volcanic features found on the lunar surface. Lunar volcanic domes are broad, convex, and circular to oval landforms of modest positive relief. Marius Hills Complex is one of the most important regions in the entire lunar surface for having a complex setting of volcanic constructs with an abundant number of volcanic features like domes, cones and rilles. Mapping of domes and estimation of morphometric parameters is very much significant for understanding of volcanic processes in the region. In the past most of morphometric and rheological studies of lunar domes  in the Marius hills region (MHR) [1] and other mare regions [2,3,4] were carried out using ground based  telescopic data. A consolidated Lunar dome catalogue based on terrestrial telescopic observations show 30 lunar domes in MHR. Authors have used orbital satellite based high resolution stereo data for identifying 106 domes and studying their morphometry and rheology.  Data used and Methodology:  Recent high resolution satellite remote sensing data sets from  Chandrayaan-1 [5] and SELENE data sets [6] are available at a high spatial resolution of ortho-images (5-10 m) and posting of DEMs at 10 - 25 m. These data sets are sufficient for morphometric study of  the domes, cones and estimation of the  rheological parameters. In this study systematic mapping of  domes in the Marius hills region was carried out using ortho-image and Digital Elevation Model (DEM) data sets from Chandrayaan-1 Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC), acquired at an orbital height of 100 km [5] and data sets of Terrain Camera (TC) of SELENE mission [6]  in the data gap regions of TMC images. Image mosaics of  of ortho and  DEM images for the Marius hills region are prepared using data sets available from SELENE data archive [7] shown in Fig. 1.      Topography over Marius hills region varies between -3815 m and 139 m (Fig.1). The topographic variations of the area under study is systematically analysed to map the domes. In this study 106 lunar domes/cones are identified in the Marius Hills Complex region (Fig. 1) and morphometric parameters are measured and furthery rheological properties like viscosity, effusion rate  are estimated.    Topographic variations over the individual  domes are studied in detail using cross-sectional profiles of surface elevation and contour maps. Boundary of the individual domes are demarcated based on the flattening of topography at the periphery of the domes and further refined by identification of closed contours of topography, at the base of these domes.  Morphometric parameters of the domes:  Various morphometric parameters of the domes likediameter, height, circularity index and form factor are  estimated for the mapped domes/cones. Diameter and corresponding height of domes mapped in this study ranges from 1.5 to 12 km and 80 to 450m, respectively.  Out of these 91 domes having the diameters  between 2-8 km (Fig. 2a). In general domes are not perfectly circular in shape. Circularity index is the ratio of minor to major axis of the domes, which   indicates the shape of domes/cones at the base. In this study for most of the domes it varies between 0.5 to 0.9 (Fig. 2b), indicating domes are elliptical to circular in shape at the base of the domes.     Volume of these domes are estimated from the DEM using 3D integration method. The estimated volume is used to redefine the form-factor of the dome.  Form factor of the domes is calculated using formula f = V/[πh(D/2)2], where f = form factor, V = volume, D = diameter, h= height of the dome [3]. Volume of the domes/cones mapped in this study varies between 0.3 to 10.9 km3. Form factor of most of domes varies between ~0.30 to 0.50, indicating most of the domes having conical to parabolic shapes in vertical extent.  Rheological properties of the domes:  Rheological properties of the domes like viscosity, i.e. yielding a measure for the fluidity of the erupted magma, the effusion rate E, i.e. the lava volume erupted per second are estimated using morpho-metric properties based on the approach adopted in similar studies on Moon [2,3,8].       In the case of Marius Hills, domes  presumably consist of several superimposed volcanic constructs and therefore formulation for estimation of rheologic properties cannot be applied directly [1]. However in this study, rheological parameters  estimated by assuming domes to be monogenetic in nature and morphologically/topographically isolated from adjacent domes. So the computed values for  plastic viscosity, effusion rate are upper limits to the respective true values.  However analysis based on multi-phase volcanism of cluster of domes and estimation of consequent rheological parameters could be attempted in future studies. In this study we adopted density of magma as 2800 kg/m3. 2498.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Estimted viscosities of domes mapped in this study varies between 4.6x105 to 3.3x108 Pas. Majority of domes have the viscosities in the range of 106 -107 Pas (Fig. 2c). Effusion rate of the domes mapped in this study varies between 2 - 82 m3s-1.  Summary and discussion:  Morphological mapping in the Marius hills region shows (i) several cluster of domes, (ii) few rilles associated with domes, (iii) alignment of domes in the regional topographical /structural trend (NW-SE), (iv) wrinkle ridges having preferred orientations. This study provided the variation of morphometric properties of domes/cones quantitatively. The  results indicates that Marius hills region might have under gone compresspion regime in NESW direction and evolved in muti phases. Rheological properties (viscosity and effusion rate) domes/cones  are estimted based on assumption of monogenetic eruption, however this addresses  the upper limits to actual parameters. Further detailed analysis of variation of morphometric vs rheological propoerties and estimation of surface ages of  different geological units of Marius hills region will provide better understanding of different phases of volcanism in Marius hills region.                     Fig. 1: (a) Ortho image mosaic, (b) Topographic map  of Marius hills region prepared using SELENE data showing the location of  domes mapped in this study using Chandrayaan-1 TMC and SELENE data sets.                                      Fig. 2:  Histograms of (a) diameter and Height, (b) circularity index and form factor, (c) viscosity and effusion rates of the domes/cones mapped in Marius hills region. Acknowledgements: Authors are thankful to Dr J.S. Parihar, Deputy Director SAC, for his valuable guidance and support. Authors are also thankful to Shri Tapan Misra, DD-MRSA & TDP / R&D review committe team members for critical comments and suggestions. References:  [1] Lena R. et al. (2009), EPSC, 4, (Abstract # EPSC2009-262). [2] Wöhler C. et al. (2006) Icarus, 183, 237-264. [3] Wöhler C. et al. (2007) Icarus, 189, 279-307, 2007. [4] Lena R. et al. (2007), Planet. Space. Sci. 55, 1201-1217. [5] Srivastava P. K. et al. (2009) Coordinates, 4, 6-10. [6] Haruyama J. et al. (2009) Science, 323, 5916, 905-908. [7] https://www.soac.selene.isas.jaxa.jp/archive [8] Wilson L. and  Head J.W. (2003) J. Geophys. Res. 108 (E2), 5012-5018. 2498.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
