2510.PDF
SIMULATIONS OF PARTICLE IMAPCT AT LUNAR MAGNETIC ANOMALIES AND COMPARISONWITH SPECTRAL OBSERVATIONS.  E. M. Harnett1 and G. Y. Kramer2, 1University of Washington, Earth andSpace Sciences, Box 351310, Seattle, WA, 98195-1310 (eharnett@ess.washington.edu), 2Lunar and Planetary Institute, 3600 Bay Area Blvd, Houston, TX 77058 (kramer@lpi.usra.edu).Introduction:  Lunar swirls are high albedo regions on the lunar surface which appear to correspondto surface magnetic anomalies. (See review by [1]).While the origin of the lunar swirls is not yet resolved,one of the main theories is that the anomalous magnetic field deflects incoming ions, which would otherwise impact the surface and alter the spectral propertiesof the lunar regolith through the creation of nano-phaseiron [2]. These incoming particles may be completelydeflected away from the surface or they may be de flected to other regions on the surface. It is thought thatthe dark lanes, regions of very low albedo adjacent toswirls, may correspond to locations of enhanced particle flux associated with the nearby partible deflection(For a more in depth discussion see [2]). In this work, we present results of particle trackingstudies following the interaction of ions and electronswith modeled 3D vector magnetic fields of actual magnetic anomalies, generated from satellite observations.Impact maps for each simulated anomalous region aregenerated and compared with spectral observations ofthe same regions. The objective is to assess the relationship between the surface pattern and maturity ofthe high albedo swirls and dark lanes and the flux ofcharged particles interacting with the magnetic fieldand density reaching the surface.Me t hod:     Simulated anomalous magnetic fieldwere generated by [3-4]. The resolution of the magnetic field in all cases is 0.1o and map projection issimple cylindrical. The simulated region varied foreach case, and included the full region plus several degrees surrounding. The results presented here are forthe Ingenii, Gerasimovich, and Reiner Gamma anomaly regions. The total magnetic field simulated included just the anomalous magnetic field and theanomalous magnetic field plus a superposition of several different interplanetary magnetic fields (Bvertical =±2 nT, Bhorizontal = ±2 nT).For the particle tracking studies, 400,000 non-interacting ions or electrons were launched at the magnetized surface for the variety of total magnetic field configurations. Particle trajectories were computed untilall the particles either impacted the surface or left thesimulation area. The velocity distributions for all casesare Maxwellians with a mean speed of 200 km s -1 and athermal speed of 75 km s-1. Total densities and fluxes at the surface were computed by distributing the particles, in a weighted manner, on to a grid with the same resolution as the magnetic field data, and summing over the collected particles. Densities and fluxes were normalized so that thesuperparticle density in the initial launch region corresponded to 5 particles cm-3, nominal solar wind densities at 1 AU. Images and mapping of the swirls used Clementinemultispectral data (Fig. 1a), projected and co-registeredto match the magnetic field maps. Qualitative analysisof surface maturity used the OMAT algorithm of [5].Results and Discussion:  For all the anomalous regions simulated, maps of particle flux to the surface foreach anomalous region showed little difference between the cases with an interplanetary magnetic field(IMF) and the case without an IMF, and little difference between the different IMF cases. The resultsshown here are for the cases without an IMF, in orderto remove any magnetic field offset from the superposition. Mare Ingenii.  Figure 1 shows the results for theswirl region at Mare Ingenii. The strongest surfacemagnetic field  (~ 35oS and 160oE, Fig. 1b) is seen tocorrespond with a void in the flux (Fig. 1c) and the lowparticle densities at the surface (Fig. 1d). Not only isthe number of particles impacting that region small, thespeed of those that do, has been reduced.  Central tothis void region is the portion of the lunar swirl withthe highest optical albedo (Fig. 1a).  This correspondswith the brightest, bluest (flat spectral continuum), andmost optically immature swirl surface at Ingenii.Both to the north and south of this void are regionsof enhanced surface flux and density. It is harder tocorrelate these regions of enhanced flux with darklanes purely from the optical image alone in part because these locations are coincident with the rims ofthe mare-filled craters Thompson and Thompson M,which, being rich in the plagioclase, cannot darken likethe dark lanes on the maria.The simulations begin to describe the interactionsthat occur between the particles and the magnetic fieldthat are pattern manifested as complex patterns ofbright and dark on the surface. This is demonstrated bycomparing the simulation results and swirl outlineswithin Thompson Crater. Unfortunately, the simulations stops short of describing the intricacy of the darklanes observable in the optical images likely because ofthe coarser resolution of the magnetic field data. 2510.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Reiner Gamma and Gerasimovich Similar to Ingenii, the particle tracking for both these cases showsreduced flux and density at the surface in the vicinityof the strongest magnetic field. The flux to the surfaceat the peak field strength at Reiner Gamma is not zerothough, like the void region for Mare Ingenii. Instead itis on the order of 5x109 particles cm-2 s-1, approximately 1/10th the peak flux seen in Figure 1c. ForGerasimovich, the flux at the region of strongest magnetic field is on the order of 1010 particles cm-2 s-1, or1/5th the peak flux in Figure 1c. This can not be explained by surface magnetic field strength alone as thepeak magnetic field strengths at Gerasimovich arecomparable to those at Mare Ingenii and approximately20% stronger than the peak field strengths at ReinerGamma. Interpretation and Next Steps For all cases, theelectrons show significantly more deflection than theions. Taking this into account, means the flux maps forhydrogen ions shown here are worst case scenarios. Inreality, an electric field would be generated as the electrons are stopped while the ions continue towards thesurface. This electric field will pull the ions back towards the electrons, leading to more deflection of theions than shown in these results. The next step will beto run simulations that incorporate this effect. The results also point to the need for higher resolution magnetic field data. Many of the features in Figure1d, particularly the dark lanes, are smaller than the 0.1ogrid spacing of the magnetic field. 3D magnetic fielddata with much higher resolution than that currentlyavailable will be necessary to fully understand the formation of these structures.  References: [1] Blewett D T. et al. (2011) JGR, 116, E02002, doi:10.1029/2010JE003656, [2] Kramer G. Y. et al. (2011) JGR, 116, E04008, doi:1029/2010JE003669, [3] Purucker M. E. and Nicholas J. B. (2010) JGR, 115, E12007, doi:10.1029/2010JE003650. [4] www.planetmag.net/index.html. [5] Lucey et al. (2000) JGR 105, p. 20,377.Figure 1: (a) Ingenii region and outlines of swirls. Basemap is Clementine simulated true color (R=900 nm, G=750 nm, B=415 nm).  There are more swirls to the NW of Ingenii, but have not yet been mapped as of submission of this abstract. The white box and black contours in (b)-(d) correspond to the extent of the map and outlined swirls, respectively, in (a).(b)-(d) Simulation results for Ingenii swirl region. (b) Magnitude of the anomalous magnetic field at the surface (values innT), (c) the particle flux at the surface (particles cm -2 s-1), (c) the particle density at the surface (particles cm -3).2510.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
