2531.PDF
TESTING THE CRYOVOLCANIC SILL MODEL FOR THE FORMATION OF DOUBLE RIDGES ON JUPITER’S MOON EUROPA.  A. J. Dombard1, K. L. Craft2, and G. W. Patterson2, 1Earth & Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL (adombard@uic.edu), 2Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD.   Introduction:  Double ridges are the most ubiquitous landform on Europa, an icy satellite of Jupiter only slightly smaller than the Earth’s Moon. These features consist of parallel ridges separated by a medial trough and are typically ~1 km wide, of order 100 m tall, possess slopes generally < 20°, and can run remarkably consistently for > 1000 km across the surface. The paucity of impact craters on Europa and the multiple generations of double ridges that crisscross the surface (as well as other features unique to the satellite) all point to the dynamic and geologically recent evolution to Europa’s crust, an icy layer ~20 km thick that overlies a liquid water ocean that then surrounds a silicate interior [1]. This activity, as well as maintenance of the ocean, is likely driven by tidal dissipation from a resonance in which Europa sits [e.g., 2]. Clearly to understand Europa, one must understand the formation of these double ridges. We have recently evaluated [3] various models for their formation by examining how consistent the models are with the observation of lithospheric flexure at some double ridges. These features place a load on the surface, and for sufficiently thin lithospheres, the surface warps under this load, resulting in a subtle topographic signature (a flexural trough immediately next to the ridge and a flanking forebulge) and perhaps flanking tensile cracks that are typically 1-3 km from the center of the ridge and form where tensile bending stresses peak. We found [3] that all previously proposed models of double ridge formation are inconsistent with the observation of flexure. Simply loading the lithosphere with a ridge under a high regional heat flow necessitates heat flows far higher than tidal dissipation can supply, which implicates thermal anomalies associated with the various formation mechanisms as a means to thin locally the lithosphere. Yet even for the case of thermal steady-state (the state most conducive to flexure), all previously proposed models yield thermal anomalies too small or too spatially limited to permit the observed flexure. Thus, we proposed a variant of a cryovolcanic model of double ridge formation, in which the surface ridge is built from a cryoclastic fissure eruption on the surface [4], but under our variant, the growing ridge is underlain by a cryomagmatic sill that is emplaced under the ridge near the depth of neutral buoyancy for water in Europa’s ice shell (~1 km deep), the heat of which locally thins the lithosphere. Notably, the flexural behavior is different from that for the case of a high regional heat flow, in that the lateral distance to the peak tensile stresses (and hence the distance from the ridge center that the flanking fractures would form) is primarily a function of the width of the sill.  Formation of flanking fractures in the range of 1-3 km from the ridge center requires sills of comparable width, because the peak stresses occur near the transition from thin to thick lithosphere. This cryovolcanic sill model is the only mechanism proposed for the formation of double ridges that is consistent with the observation of flexure. (Additionally given the ubiquity of double ridges on this youthful surface, this model is also a strong candidate to explain the recent Hubble observations of icy emissions from the south polar region of Europa [5].) We did note, however, several serious problems with this model [3]. For instance, the remarkable uniformity along strike is a challenge, as it is for all models of double ridge formation.  Furthermore, shallow injection of a sill would result in inflation of the surface. Europa’s topography is noisy at the 10 m level, which suggests the sills might only be of order 10 m thick; however, the heat content of such a thin sill is insufficient to thin locally the lithosphere, unless the sill is constantly recharged without freezing with fresh cryomagma (aka, water). The lifetime of this system was left unconstrained. Thus, we continue our efforts [6, 7] to assess the possibility of sills associated with double ridge formation on Europa. Here, we re-examine our finite element simulations of lithospheric flexure to explore sill lifetime and how it affects the thickness of the lithosphere. In our previous work [3], we simply considered thermal steady-state for all formation models, as this case yields the warmest conditions most conducive to flexure. If a model can’t reproduce the observed flexure under this case, then it certainly won’t under a more realistic transient case. While the cryovolcanic sill model was the only mechanism consistent with flexure under thermal steady-state, we now test it under a more realistic thermal regime. Methods:  We follow exactly the procedures documented in [3]. We perform a suite of finite element simulations using an elastic-viscous-plastic composite rheology, starting first with a steady-state thermal simulation, the results of which are piped into a mechanical simulation with a growing ridge. Instead of locking the temperature at 270 K of the nodes 1 km deep and extending some distance from the central ridge (here, 2531.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
2.3 km, which resulted in peak plastic strains [i.e., the flanking fractures] at 2 km from the central axis) to simulate the thermal anomaly of a thin sill, we consider lower values for this fixed temperature to quantify how warm the lithosphere needs to be in order to reproduce still the observed flexure. In future simulations, we will shed the constraint of thermal steady-state and explore a transient thermal solution in which we track the local conductive heating of the ice surrounding the sill. This suite of simulations will allow us to explore directly the sill lifetime that is required to thin sufficiently the lithosphere to reproduce the observed flexure. Results:  In our previous work [3], we considered a system with a thin sill 1 km deep that extended 2.3 km from the central ridge. For a sill (and central conduit) temperature locked at 270 K (plus a background heat flux of 40 mW m-2 and a surface temperature of 100 K, which yields a nominal temperature at 1 km depth of ~107 K), peak in-plane plastic strains reach ~0.6% at 2 km from the central axis, consistent with the formation of the flanking tensile cracks seen at some ridges. If we drop the sill temperature, the character of the deformation stays the same: the deformation is concentrated over the sill and has peak plastic strains near the transition from thin to thick lithospheres (~2 km from the central axis, consistent with observations). The only substantive difference is that the magnitude of deformation decreases (Fig. 1). With decreasing sill temperature, peak plastic strain drops almost linearly until ~210 K. By 170 K, all lateral plastic strain is eliminated because the thermal anomaly is now too weak to thin the lithosphere sufficiently. Discussion:  Our preliminary results suggest that the cryovolcanic sill model still works for a more realistic transient case. The effective sill temperature can be significantly less than the freezing point of water, which suggests that only periodic recharge of the sill is required, perhaps by tidal pumping. Further, we can use these results to constrain the lifetime of the system. A simple model of diffusive heating by the sill of the overlying ice (assuming a thermal diffusivity of order 10-6 m2 s-1) suggests that the sill can heat the ice to yield a temperature profile that resembles a steady-state case with an effective sill temperature of ~200 K in a time frame of order 104 yr. Thus, if double ridges form over time scales of at least 10 kyr (we estimated 100 kyr in [3]) and the sill can be recharged with fresh water, then the cryovolcanic sill model can yield a transient thermal anomaly that might thin the lithosphere sufficiently to reproduce the observed flexure. As stated above, future simulations will test this conclusion more rigorously. References:  [1] Pappalardo R.T. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 24015-24056. [2] Schubert G. et al. (2004) In Jupiter (Bagenal F. et al. eds.), Cambridge U. Press, 281-306. [3] Dombard A.J. et al. (2013) Icarus, 223, 74-81. [4] Kadel S.D. et al. (1998) LPS XXIX, Abstract #1078. [5] Roth L. et al. (2013) Science, doi: 10.1126/science.1247051. [6] Craft K.L. et al. (2013) LPS XLIV, Abstract #3033. [7] Craft K. et al. (2013) Fall Mtg. AGU, Abstract #P53A-1847.  00.10.20.30.40.50.6100 150 200 250 300Peak In-Plane Plastic Strain (%)Effective Sill Temperature (K)Figure 1. Peak in-plane plastic strains as a function of effective sill temperature. 2531.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
