2536.PDF
ASCERTAINING THE TEMPORAL STABILITY OF WATER ICE IN KOROLEV CRATER, MARS.     T. C. Brothers1, J. W. Holt1, A. Spiga2, 1University of Texas Institute for Geophysics, Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78758 TCBrothers@utexas.edu. 2Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, France.   Introduction:  Korolev crater is a water ice-filled, ~80 km diameter, impact crater located at 73o N, 163oE on Mars.  Given its location over 600 km south of the modern ice cap's edge (Fig. 1), this crater is unusual because of the domal deposit of H2O ice [1]. Mapping efforts using SHAllow RADar (SHARAD) on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter revealed the deposit's thickness to be at least 2 km [2,3].  Additionally, the stratigraphy of Korolev's icy deposit as revealed by SHARAD has been compared to that of the North Polar Layered Deposits (NPLD) in Planum Boreum.  The thickness of NPLD ice is very similar to Korolev as is the alteration between reflector-dense and reflectorpoor vertical sections [3].  Given that Planum Boreum's NPLD are hypothesized to have originated approximately four million years ago [4,5], stratigraphic similarity with Korolev suggests that both may be recent, implying that the ice in Korolev is not part of an ancient ice sheet or evidence of a different climate regime.  However, global climate modeling showsKorolev crater within a zone of instability for exposed H2O ice [6], making formation in the modern climate regime impossible. This work will address the disagreement between global atmospheric climate modeling and observations of Korolev's ice stratigraphy using an idealized atmospheric model.  If modern orbital conditions of Mars do not allow for stable ice at Korolev, this implies that the ice pre-dates Planum Boreum and is undergoing retreat.  Should this be the case, the mesoscale climate model used can be modified by changing orbital conditions to ascertain stable conditions.  This tuning would aid in estimating a past time period during which Korolev's ice deposit may have formed.  Methods:  The primary tool used for this study is the Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique (LMD) mesoscale climate model.  The model uses results from LMD's global climate model, a Mars parameterized and optimized version of the Advanced Research Weather Research and Forecasting model (ARWWRF), to ascertain boundary conditions for the mesoscale model [7].  In addition, the model adds flexibility with nested runs to achieve higher resolution on the mesoscale simulations.  Resolution that may be crucial for calculating the stability of H2O ice at Korolev. This work will focus on idealized simulations for Korolev crater that will help determine when and where water ice is stable.  Model runs will be done at varying solar longitudes (Ls) and obliquities to clarify the temporal changes that water ice may have experienced in Korolev. In addition to modeling, this work will rely on previous SHARAD studies of Korolev crater [3].  SHARAD is a 20 MHz central frequency, chirped pulse, 10 MHz bandwidth, orbital radar sounding on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter [8].  The mapping results from prior work give a qualitative idea for ice stability during deposition at Korolev crater, which can be compared with modeling results to help ascertain validity. Discussion:  Idealized modeling offers a unique tool to analyze water ice stability on Mars.  As Korolev crater contains large quantities of water ice where it is theoretically unstable, the crater offers a unique and valuable case study to further scientific understanding Fig 1: (Left) Context map showing overview with Planum Boreum and Korolev crater. (Right) Zoom of Korolev crater.  Note asymmetry of ice deposition within crater as well as the similarity of the deposits elevation to the surrounding plains.  Data are from MOLA with an overlain hillshade. 2536.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
of the evolution of icy deposits in Mars northern hemisphere near Planum Boreum. As results have not yet been obtained, there exists the possibility that either stable or unstable water ice will be predicted for Korolev under modern conditions.  If atmospheric modeling demonstrates modern stability, it would lend credence to Korolev crater's central mound being coeval with ice found in Planum Boreum.  Coeval ice has large implications for global Mars climate during the last few million years and would support prior suggestion that the stratigraphy and perhaps climate patterns contained in Korolev are consistent and related to those found in the NPLD indicating regionally consistent climate signals for water ice surrounding the north pole [3]. Should modeling show current conditions at Korolev are unstable, this work will conceivably help constrain timing for ancient ice deposition in Korolev.  Alteration of obliquity and Ls until stable conditions are attained will provide information pertaining to the deposit's age.  Either result provides information vital to understanding geologically recent regional water ice trends for northern Mars.  Therefore, it is crucial that we understand the origin of Korolev's ice and its relationship to Mars global water cycle.  Unveiling the age of ice in Korolev will determine whether the deposit can be used to examine ancient or modern Martian atmospheric conditions, thereby focusing scientific research of circumpolar ice on Mars and furthering our understanding of Mars water ice depositional history.  References: [1] Armstrong J. C. et al. (2005) Icarus, 174, 360-372. [2] Moore M. W. et al. (2012) LPSC XLIII, Abstract #2894. [3] Brothers T.C. and Holt J.W. (2013) LPSC XLIV, Abstract #3022. [4] Levrard et al. (2007) J. Geophys. Res., 112, E06012. [5] Greve R. et al. (2010) Planetary and Space Science, 58, 931-940. [6] Madeleine J.B. et al. (2009) Icarus, 203, 390-405. [7] Spiga A. and François F. (2009) J. Geophys. Res., 114, E02009. [8] Seu R. et al. (2007) J. Geophys. Res., 112, E05S05. 2536.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
