 MODELING TOPOGRAPHIC CHANGES BY BALLISTIC SEDIMENTATION FROM ORIENTALE EJECTA. Ya-Huei Huang, David A. Minton, and James E. Richardson Purdue University Department of Earth, Atmospheric, & Planetary Sciences, 550 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN 47907 (huang474@purdue.edu) Motivation. The ejecta blanket produced from basinsized craters deposits at high speed and alters the preexisting topography in a process known as ballistic sedimentation and erosion. Ballistically deposited ejecta also mixes with local country rock [1], and quantitative modeling of the sedimentation process will help better understand how crustal material is transported by basin-sized impacts. In general, the change of pre-existing terrain caused by the emplacement of ejecta blanket is one of the basin sculpture processes. Basin sculpture from Imbrium basin was noted by G. K. Gilbert in 1893 [2]. Imbrium sculpture includes the prominent parallel valleys, grooves and ridges radiated from the center of Imbrium Basin [3, 4]. Similar basin sculptures are also found in Orientale, Nectaris, Humorum, and Crisium basins [5]. Ballistic sedimentation and erosion by massive basin ejecta blankets may obliterate craters on a surface more efficiently than seismic shaking. The ∼ 930 km diameter Orientale crater is an ideal basin for studying the effects of ballistic sedimentation by basins, as it is one of the last of the large lunar basin to form and therefore its ejecta deposits were not heavily altered by subsequent cratering [6]. The deficiency of craters smaller than 2 km within one crater rim distance from the center of Orientale Basin has been observed [7, 8]. Smooth intercrater plains units on the lunar highlands may be composed primarily of ballistically emplaced sediments from numerous large craters and basins [1]. Here we develop a model for the topographic changes to a terrain caused by the energetic emplacement of a continuous sheet of ejecta material near the rim of a large lunar impact basin. We will use the observations of crater obliteration near the rim of Orientale as a constraint on the model. Theoretical Method. The ejecta that emerges at the surface of the impact site with a given impact velocity can be modeled as a hydrodynamic fluid flow known as Maxwell Z-model [9, 10]. Figure 1 illustrates the concept of how a block of ejecta of a given size is related to the flow streamlines within the excavation flow of the crater. This model describes ejecta as composed of material along a "streamtube" that originates near the point of impact and can be foumulated to describe the mass, ejected velocity, and ejection angle of ejecta. After the ejecta block collides with the surface, it excavates and transports material radially away from the crater. We can determine how much material is excavated and how far it is transported by using conservation of energy and momentum. Therefore, the two major unknown parameters involved in the ballistic erosion problem are the excavation depth, hr, and the total sliding distance of material (both pre-existing surface material and ejecta), l. To facilitate the implementation of a numerical code, we treat the ejecta blanket and the lunar surface as comTransient crater Streamlines Ejecta block 1 px he vmin vmax vmin vmax hr Lunar block θe+θs Figure 1: Schematic cross section view of an ejecta emplacement model. Excavated material from within the transient crater is highleighted in light red. Shown in dark red on the left is the stream tube that bounds the material excavated to produce the block of ejecta on the right. The figure on the right is shown the ejecta block with its blanket height, he, and its corresponding lunar block with hr. Also, the ejected angle of ejecta block is θe, and the angle of the slope, θs, is defined within [−π2 , π2 ], in which the negative/positive slope represents the downslope/upperslope. posed of a gird of discrete finite elements. As shown in right part of Figure 1, the volume of each 1 × 1 pixel ejecta block and lunar regolith block is dwdbhe and dwdbhr respectively. Firstly, the vertical momentum is used for the planar impact approximation [11] to estimate the excavation depth, including the stage of compression ( heUp ut) and rarefaction ((ρ0p/ρ)he CR ut ). Since the time scale of excavation is short compared to the total time scale of cratering, the excavation depth can be approximated as twice as the excavation depth during compression stage. Based on Rankine-Hugoniot jump conditions and the shock velocity-particle velocity relation in the target and the projectile, the excavation depth can be found in terms of the impact velocity in the vertical direction (ve sin θe) and the two parameters in Us − ut space: st and ct. hr = heve sin θe [ct + st(ve sin θe/2)] (1) Secondly, the ejecta block (dm) is assumed to move together with the excavated lunar regolith block (dM − dm) horizontally. Based on the conservation of horizontal momentum, the total sliding distance of material can be calculated out by the impulse-momentum theorem in Eq. 2. The change of a momentum of the whole system is the impulse that the total of all forces exert on the ejecta and lunar regolith block throughout emplacement. The total forces is assumed to be the constant force consisting of resistive force (Fres), friction (Fk), and gravity (Fg). The resistive force arises from the lunar regolith block and sliding surface as they resist the movement of ejecta block, including internal friction (σ tanφe) and cohesion (c). The friction (µkdM cos θs) would resist the relative motion between the detached lunar regolith block and the  lunar regolith surface when the sliding begins. Gravity (dM sin θs) affects the how the resistance depends on the local slope angle. ve cos(θe + θs)dm = T∫ 0Ftotdt (2) The constant force decelerates the ejecta blanket and lunar regolith block. According to the Newton's 2nd Law, the differential impulsing time, dt, can be converted into the differential sliding distance, dl. 12 v2e cos 2(θe + θs)dm = l∫ 0(Ftot) (hr + he) he dl (3) Therefore, l is obtained: l = 12v 2e cos 2(θe + θs)ρehe (hr + he)/he [c+ κgρe(hr + he)] (4) in which κ defines as (cos θs tanφe + µ cos θs + sin θs). Estimate of transport distance. The rock present below Orientale Basin mixes with lunar maria and impact breccia. The strength and rock type of surrounding bedrock and regolith are important for determining the penetration depth. We therefore consider the effects on the ballistic erosion process using two different rock types: hard basalt and loose sandstone. For basalt, we choose ct = 2.6 km/s and st = 1.62 [12]. Highresolution gravity data of the dual Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) implies that the crust near Orientale basin has high porosity of ∼ 20% [13]. Therefore we choose ct = 0.5 km/s and st = 3.2 for our simulated porous impact breccia in Orientale Basin using sandstone with 20 % porosity [14]. In Figure 2, only the basalt case is shown here. Within one rim distance, the ejecta can excavate the depth varying from 500 m to 80 m and slide a distance from 50 km to 100 km. On the other hand, the excavation depth within one rim distance in 20% porosity sandstone ranges from 1.2 km to 0.1 km, about twice as deep as in the basalt case. This is expected due to the lower density of porous sandstone. The sliding distance in the sandstone case ranges from about 40 km to 80 km. The maximum excavation depth (1.2 km) could potentially erase the craters of ∼6 km diameter, and craters of ∼300 m diameter for 80 m excavation depth [15]. Within one to three rim distance, the sliding distance increases rapidly in both cases from ∼100 km to 250 km as the ejecta thickness decreases. This is expected as the thinner ejecta with larger ejected velocity would be deposit with more specific momentum than the thicker ejecta. However, the thicker ejecta excavates material deeper than the thinner ejecta, even though the thinner ejecta has a higher ejected velocity. 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 0  100  200  300  400  500 32 1 0 Slid in g di st an ce ( km )Penetration depth (m) Landing distance from rim (RCR) Basalt Figure 2: The black line shows the sliding distance with excavation depth in the basalt case. The top x-axis is shown the landing distance of ejecta relative to Cordillera Ring of Orientale Basin (465 km). References [1] Oberbeck V.R. (1975) Reviews of Geophysics and Space Physics, 13, 337-362. [2] Gilbert G.K. (1893) The Moon's Face: A Study of the Origin of Its Features, Bulletin of the Philosophical Society of Washington. [3] Hartmann W.K. (1964) Communications of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 2, 1-16. [4] Head J.W. (1976) Moon, 15, 445-462. [5] Hartmann W.K. (1964) Communications of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, 2, 175-192. [6] Wilhelms D.E. et al. (1987) Washington : U.S. G.P.O. ; Denver. [7] Moore H.J. et al. (1974) Lunar Science Conference 5 (n/a), 71-100. [8] Fassett C.I. et al. (2011) Geophysical Research Letters, 38, 17,201. [9] Maxwell D. and Seifert K. (1974) Tech. rep., Defense Nuclear Agency, Washington, D.C. [10] Maxwell D.E. (1977) Impact and explosion cratering. Planetary and terrestrial implications, 1003-1008. [11] Gault D.E. and Heitowit E.D. (1963) Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium on Hypervelocity Impact, 2, 38. [12] Melosh H.J. (1989) Impact cratering: A geologic process, book. [13] Wieczorek M.A. et al. (2013) Science, 339, 671675. [14] GÜLdemeister N. et al. (2013) Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 48, 115-133. [15] Pike R.J. (1977) Lunar Science Conference 8 (n/a), 34273436. 