2571.PDF
Observations and Analysis of 2577 Litva N. B. Lust1 and D. T. Britt1, 1University of CentralFloridaIntroductionRemote observations of small bodies are a cheap wayto gather information about our celestial neighbors, especially when compared to robotic spacecraft missions.The information gathered can provide insights into topics ranging from solar system formation and evolutionto impact mitigation. Additionally, with NASA focusingon visiting and capturing a small near earth body, theseobservations can perform invaluable support and information gathering roles.We are specifically interested in the physical properties and structure of small bodies, features such as thebulk and grain density, porosity, and composition. Binary asteroid systems provide an invaluable resource formeasuring these properties. In a binary system one ormore smaller asteroids orbit about the primary, akin toa planet and moon system. If the orbital period of thesecondary can be determined, it can be used in conjunction with Kepler’s equations to determine the mass ofthe system. With brightness estimates on the two components, and assumptions about reflectance of the asteroids, the relative sizes of each body can be determinedand their relative masses inferred. Together with volumeestimates, the bulk density can be measured. If composition information is available or estimated, the differencebetween the grain densities and the bulk density will provide the bulk porosity and insights into the structure ofthe body.We present the results from observations of asteroid2577 Litva, a known binary. In our analysis we focus onerror (uncertainty) budgeting, identification, and propagation. We use robust statistical methods and routinesat each step of reduction and analysis to both determinephysical properties with meaningful error estimates, andto show the applicability of making this type of measurement on relatively modest equipment.History of 2577 Litva2577 Litva is a Mars-crossing asteroid discovered in1975 by N. Chernykh. In 2009 the object was discovered to be a binary member of the Hungaria family [1].Being a binary, the object warranted additional follow upas there are relatively few binaries known and opportunities to determine physical properties are extremely valuable. Merline et. al. observed the asteroid in June andAugust 2012, and again in August and October 2013 anddiscovered a second satellite [2].Figure 1: A subset of the collected lightcurve was phasedabout the published period. This produces a plot wherethe x-axis is the percentage (aka location) of one full rotation.Observations and FacilitiesOur observations were taken in December 2013 and January 2014, with a baseline spanning several weeks. Thiswas enough to ensure that several full periods were observed, getting complete phase coverage. The observations were taken at Robinson Observatory, located oncampus at the University of Central Florida in Orlando.This facility features a 0.5 meter RitcheyChre´tien telescope on a German equatorial mount. The data is collected on an SBIG 6303e full frame sensor, and analyzed with custom software written in the Python programming language. Figure 2 (next page) shows an example lightcurve from one night’s observation, Figure 1shows a subset of our observations phased about the published period which emphasizes our phase coverage andthe shape of the light curve.Reduction and AnalysisWhen working with modest facilities and faint targets,robust routines specialized for low signal-to-noise scenarios are necessary. We make use of methodologies outlined in [3].Our suite of programs includes routines foraccurately determining the centers of photometric distributions (least asymmetry centering and bayesian denoising), and routines for finding periods and how theychange in time (such as Fourier analysis, Szego polynomial fitting, wavelet analysis). In this work we also make2571.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
2Figure 2: Sample Lightcurve from one nights observation.extensive use of traditional Markov-Chain Monte Carlo[4] routines for tracking uncertainty propagation in thereduction of our data.In the analysis of our data we use the routines from[3], some being standards like Fourier curve fitting, butin conjunction with differential evolution Markov-ChainMonte Carlo routines [5]. This methodology is a combination of genetic algorithms with traditional MCMCanalysis. The advantage of this methodology is that it allows very fast searching of large parameter spaces, whilepreserving the bayesian inference on uncertainty distributions. This allows us to accurately and consistentlygenerate error bounds on our measurements in a robust,systematic, and efficient way.References[1] B. D. Warner, et al. 2577 Litva: A Hungaria Binary.Minor Planet Bulletin, 36:165–166, 2009. [2] W. J. Merline et. al. S/2012 (2577) 1. Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams, 9267, 2013. [3] N. Lust, et al. NewMethodology for the Reanalysis of Low Signal SmallBodies. In EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting 2011, page 1512.2011. [4] R. M. Neal. Probabilistic inference usingmarkov chain Monte Carlo methods. Technical ReportCRG-TR-93-1, University of Toronto, 1993. [5] Cajo J.Braak. A markov chain monte carlo version of thegenetic algorithm differential evolution: Easy bayesiancomputing for real parameter spaces. Statistics and Computing, 16(3):239–249, 2006. ISSN 0960-3174. doi:10.1007/s11222-006-8769-1.2571.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
