2584.PDF
ENHANCED LUNAR RECONNAISSANCE ORBITER CAMERA PLANETARY DATA SYSTEM DATA NODE  E. Bowman-Cisneros1, M.S. Robinson1, S. Thompson1, N.M. Estes1, E. Malaret2 and the LROC Team, 1Arizona State University, School of Earth and Space Exploration, PO Box 873603, Tempe AZ, 85287-3603 ebc@asu.edu, 2Applied Coherent Techonology, 112 Elden St., Suite K, Herndon, VA 20170.   Introduction: The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was launched at 5:32 pm EDT on 18 June 2009, arriving at the Moon four days later. After an 83 day spacecraft and instrument commissioning period, the LRO primary mission began with all instruments operational [1]. The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) consists of four components: two Narrow Angle Cameras (NAC) which are panchromatic line scan imagers with a 0.5 m pixel scale (from 50-km altitude); a Wide Angle Camera (WAC) 7-color pushframe imager with 100 m pixel scale; and the Sequence and Compressor System (SCS), which interfaces between the NAC and WAC cameras to the LRO spacecraft [2]. The LROC instrument suite has been in continuous operation since 4 July 2009. The LROC team plan and process all received NAC and WAC observations, for each 24-hour operational period, into Planetary Data System (PDS) Engineering Data Records (EDR) and Calibrated Data Records (CDR) [3]. The EDR/CDR products are then delivered to the NASA PDS, using a sliding three month window, at three month intervals. To date, the LROC Team has made sixteen deliveries of LROC EDR data products, totaling 1,181,548 images (826,599 NACs and 354,949 WACs, totaling 162.3 TB). A similar number of CDR products, with exceptions for images that cannot be calibrated, have also been develiered, with nearly double the volume of data on disk (336.0 TB). The team has also delivered 9,976 Reduced Data Record products, consisting of  global WAC mosaics, regional NAC mosaics and various other supporting files. As the designated Data Node for LROC PDS products, the LROC Team at Arizona State University (ASU) has developed a website to facilitate searching and visualization of the LROC image repository. The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) for the website is http://lroc.sese.asu.edu. Engineering & Calibrated Data Records Interface: The LROC Data Node interface has three primary components: a WMS Browser; a Thumbnail Browser; and an Image Search. These can be reached via the “Images” menu from the main LROC webpage or through the URL http:// wms.lroc.asu.edu/lroc. WMS Browser.  This interface (Figure 1) allows a user to interact with a map projected view of the Moon using a variety of selectable layers to display NAC footprints and find images of interest. The interface supports Orthographic, Sinusoidal, Simple Cylindrical and North or South Polar Sterographic projections. The user can provide a latitude and longitude value to center the map projection, and if NAC or WAC footprints are being displayed, click to the available images.  Thumbnail Browser.  This interface allows the users to view thumbnails of NAC and WAC observations grouped by mission phase.   Image Search.  This interface allows the user to search for images using up to eleven search criteria: Product ID, Coordinate Range, Incidence Angle, Emission Angle, Resolution, Exposure, Sub-Solar Azimuth, Sub-Solar Latitude, Orbit, Observation Date, and Product Type. A list of matching products will be shown with the option of displaying product thumbnails. Each product page provides the user with a zoomable image, metadata relating to the acquistion and location of the image, and links to the available image product. EDR products provide links to their associated CDR product and vice versa. Reduced Data Records Interface:  The Reduced Data Records (RDR) interface (Figure 2) was recently redesigned in an effort to facilite finding suitable RDR products. The default interface, the Advanced Search, provides five search criteria: Text, Coordinate Point (latitude, longitude, search radius in km), Coordinate Range (West and East longitude, North and South latitude), Topographic Product and RDR Product Type (All, Global, Polar, Regional products). In the upper left of the web page, a menu provides access to one of the following searches: Advanced Search (default), Global Products, Polar Products, Regional Products and Topographic Products. The RDR interface can be found under the Images menu from the main LROC webpage or by using the following URL   http://wms.lroc.asu.edu/lroc/rdr_product_select. Clicking the product name link opens up the product page. The page contents vary, but generally will provide a zoomable browse interface, information about the product and its creation, supporting files, and additional products in lower resolution and/or map projections. One new feature of the website allows users to see relationships between large area mosaics and their component mosaics, such as NAC Digital Terrain Models (DTM) or NAC Region of Interest (ROI) mosaics.  QuickMap: The LROC Team, in conjunction with Applied Coherent Technology (ACT), also developed an interactive interface to view NAC images overlain 2584.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
on the WAC global mosaic, allowing the user to seamlessly zoom from regional features down to the full resolution of the NAC. The QuickMap interface has links to individual NAC and WAC products (served from the LROC Data Node) to facilitate review of image meta-data and downloading a PDS product, as well as integrating additional lunar datasets (M3 spectra) to enhance selection of relevant LROC observations. The QuickMap interface can be reached via the Images menu from the main LROC webpage or via the URL http://target.lroc.asu.edu/q3. Lunaserv:  The LROC team has also developed a Web Map Service (WMS) implementation, named Lunaserv[5], that circumvents some issues with rendering global non-Earth datasets and supports the IAU2000 spatial reference system and JMARS projection. Lunaserv allows the LROC team to directly support GIS software such as Arc/Info or QGIS to access and display RDR products such as WAC Global Morphologic mosaic or NAC DTM products without first having to download the product. Conclusions: The LROC PDS Data Node provides an unprecedented ability for the science community and the general public to explore, with context, one of the fastest growing non-terrestrial data sets. The variety by which the data are presented allows differing approaches to finding and exploring LROC images. Enhancements will continue to be added to the various interfaces as the data set continues to grow and as new RDR products are generated and released. References:   [1] Tooley, C.R. et al. (2010) Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Mission and Spacecraft Design. Space Sci Rev, 150:23-62. [2] Robinson, M.S. et al. (2010)  Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) Instrument Overview. Space Sci Rev, 150:81-124. [3] Bowman-Cisneros, E (2010) LROC EDR/CDR Data Product Software Interface Specification. http://lroc.sese.asu.edu/data/LRO-L-LROC-2-EDRV1.0/LROLRC_0001/DOCUMENT/LROCSIS.PDF. [4] Bowman-Cisneros, E and Eliason, E (2011) LROC RDR Data Product Software Specification. http://lroc.sese.asu.edu/data/LRO-L-LROC-5-EDRV1.0/LROLRC_2001/DOCUMENTS/RDRSIS.PDF. [5] Estes, N.M.; Hanger, C.D.; Licht, A.A.; Bowman-Cisneros, E.; Lunaserv Web Map Service: History, Implementation Details, Development, and Uses, http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013LPICo1719.2609E   Figure 1 LROC WMS Browser Interface   Figure 2 LROC RDR Advanced Search Interface 2584.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
