 Figure 1. Summary of the spatial distribution of mineralogy in bedrock surrounding Gale, Sharp, and Knobel craters from CRISM and THEMIS (Mt. Sharp minerals within Gale [12] are not included in this compilation)   HYDROLOGY AND AQUEOUS ALTERATION IN THE WATERSHED OF GALE, SHARP, AND KNOBEL CRATERS: A REGIONAL CONTEXT FOR CURIOSITY'S EXPLORATION. B. L. Ehlmann1,2 and J. Buz1  1Geological & Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, (ehlmann@caltech.edu), 2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA   Introduction:  Between 300-km diameter Herschel crater (15S, 129E) and 150-km diameter Gale crater (5S, 138E) lies a >150,000 km2 watershed that drains northward. The last large-scale activity dates from the late-Noachian/early Hesperian [1,2] Dissection of terrain over this 7-km elevation range has eroded the bedrock and transported sediments toward Gale, Sharp, and Knobel craters, contributing to the sedimentary materials being explored by the Curiosity rover.  Thus, we examine the mineralogy of the region to determine the composition of bedrock that would be eroded and assess the composition of sedments. We seek to understand how rare or common Mg-smectite clays, like those found by Curiosity in Yellowknife bay [3-6] are in regional sedimentary materials. Given that the Peace Vallis system feeding Curiosity may have been recently active [7,8], we also perform crater counts of small-scale geologic units in order to constrain the timing of localized fluvial activity throughout in the region. Mineral mapping results: Analysis of CRISM and THEMIS data in the region show that the local bedrock, exposed on the rims of Gale and Sharp craters, is olivine-enriched in comparison to overlying rocks. Furthermore, some portions of the rims of Gale and Sharp host Fe/Mg phyllosilicates [9], indicating aqueous alteration that likely predates the formation of the impact structures (Fig. 1). Both Gale and Sharp craters have breached rims on the southwest, incised by valley networks sourced from the south. Few CRISM data exist over the southern Gale watershed, but the watershed feeding Sharp crater has been welltargeted with over a half dozen images that provide context for understanding the regional hydrology and history of aqueous alteration. At the distal end of the Sharp valley system is a well-developed depositional fan in Sharp Crater, approximately 18 km  x 10 km in size. Sediments eroding from the margins of the fan are Fe/Mgphyllosilicate-bearing and distinct in composition from  Figure 3. (a) Context of Sharp crater fan (b) CRISM parameter map showing phyllosilicate-bearing sediments embaying olivine- and pyroxene-bearing bedrock. (c) CRISM L data spectra from fan and knob regions within Sharp.     Figure 2. (a) Context of the Sharp crater fan (b) CRISM parameter map showing phyllosilicate-bearing sediments embaying olivine- and pyroxene-bearing bedrock. (c) CRISM L data spectra from the fan and knob regions within Sharp.   the surrounding olivine-bearing, apparently unaltered materials in aeolian bedforms and embayed bedrock knobs (Fig. 2). Upstream, in the proximal reaches of Sharp valley system, 150 km to the north of the rim incision, Fe/Mg-phyllosilicate bearing rocks are overlain by chloride-bearing sediments, identified by Osterloo et al. [10] and confirmed by [11]. The depth of the local depression hosting these minerals is less than 500 meters. Extending further south into the watershed toward Herschel crater are at least three other chloridebearing deposits, all located in depressions [10]. Crater counting results: Crater counting was performed of geologic units in select locations of the watershed, e.g. two fans within Sharp crater, materials overlying the chloride deposit, and lava flows covering Gale-feeding channels. The Craterstats2 program [13] with the Ivanov (2001) production function and Hartman & Neukum (2001) cumulative frequency models were used.  Preliminary data show the small-scale fluvial features (fans, chloride-capping deposit) are Amazonian in age, while age-dating of uneroded lavas shows that activity in the large-scale system feeding Gale ceased before 2.8 Gy. However, care must be taken in dating small, recent geologic units with few km-sized craters as the rate of destruction of small craters may nearly equal the age of the deposit. Work is presently underway to date surrounding geologic units with larger areas in order to build a more certain chronology. Conclusions and Future Work: Study of the Gale-Sharp-Knobel crater region is ongoing to provide context for Curiosity's exploration. Preliminarily, the geologic history includes (1) emplacement of olivineenriched bedrock; (2) aqueous alteration to Fe/Mg phyllosilicates that was heterogeneous in extent and occurrence, not pervasive; (3) formation of Gale, Sharp, and Knobel craters; (4) fluvial dissection that was most intense during the late Noachian/early Hesperian period with deposition of eroded Fe/Mg phyllosilicate bearing sediments in Sharp crater (and possibly Gale or Knobel craters as well); and (5) formation of chlorides by near-surface precipitation from fluids. Mineralogic and fluvial evidence show the availability of water progressed from regional to localized. Acknowledgements: Thanks to the CRISM and HiRISE SOCs for their efforts in acquiring these highresolution targets. This work was partially supported by the MSL Participating Scientist Program. References: [1] Irwin et al. (2005), JGR, E12S15 [2] Fassett & Head (2008), Icarus, 195, 61-89  [3] Vaniman et al., 2013, Science [4] McLennan et al., 2013, Science  [5] Ming et al., 2013, Science  [6] Grotzinger et al., 2013, Science [7] Grant et al., submitted, GRL [8] Palucis et al., submitted, JGR [9] Buz & Ehlmann, LPSC, 2013, #2549 [10] Osterloo et al., 2010, JGR [11] Ruesch et al., (2012), JGR  [12] Milliken et al. (2010), GRL [13] Michael & Neukum (2010) Earth & Plan. Sci. Lett. 