2592.PDF
NEUTRON REMOTE-SENSING AT THE MOON: MODELING THE EMPIRICAL VARIATION WITH ALTITUDE OF NEUTRON FLUX FOR THE LUNAR EXPLORATION NEUTRON DETECTOR (LEND).  T. A. Livengood1, W. V. Boynton2, G. Chin3, L. G. Evans4, M. L. Litvak5, T. P. McClanahan3, I. G. Mitrofanov5, R. Z. Sagdeev6, A. B. Sanin5, R. D. Starr7, J. J. Su6. 1Department of Astronomy, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, tlivengo@umd.edu, 2Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, 4Computer Science Corporation, Lanham-Seabrook, MD, 5Institute for Space Research, Moscow, Russia, 6Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, 7Physics Department, Catholic University of America, Washington, DC.   The Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) instrument on the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) employs a collimator to improve the spatial resolution for neutron remote-sensing of hydrogen-rich volatile deposits on the Moon, with the primary goal of mapping deposits of water at the Moon's cold high latitudes [1]. The collimator reduces the flux of lunar neutrons reaching the detector element from off-nadir directions so that neutrons reaching the detector through the narrow acceptance angle of the collimator opening contribute the primary signal. Verifying the component of epithermal neutrons that is detected in collimation is essential to estimating the actual concentration of water stored in localized deposits.   Fig. LEND signal variation with altitude (crosses), measurements from Sep 2009 to Dec 2011, within 10° latitude of north pole, averaged in intervals of 2 km altitude. Bold solid line is preferred model. Bold dotted line is a model that assumes all lunar neutrons are detected out of collimation in proportion suggested by Eke et al. [3].  Since December 2011, the LRO spacecraft has been in a quasi-stable elliptical orbit to conserve fuel used for station-keeping and momentum-management. Aposelene in this orbit is over the north pole at about 200 km altitude. Treating the north pole as a steady source of neutrons, measurements over a range of altitude can be combined from the prime mission's circular orbit at about 50 km altitude and the quasistable orbit, resulting in two groups of measurements that each range over a modest interval in altitude. The actual flux of lunar neutrons is proportional to the flux of galactic cosmic rays, whose variability is accounted for by routine data-reduction in preparing data for the Planetary Data System (PDS) [2]. All other relevant sources of neutrons also are proportional to the GCR flux, eliminating any issues of intercalibration. The measured neutron detection rate in the collimated detector CSETN decreases with altitude over the Moon's north pole. The decrease with altitude results from a superposition of neutron sources, each with its own variability with altitude: spacecraft-generated background due to GCR interactions with the spacecraft itself increases with altitude; the flux of lunar neutrons out of collimation decreases with altitude; and the flux of lunar neutrons in collimation is approximately uniform with altitude, as the Moon fills the collimator field of view at all relevant altitudes. The contribution of each neutron source can be modeled with altitude and compared with the measured detection rate to constrain the fraction of measured signal delivered in each mode. In particular, the detection rate in collimation can be estimated. We find that the measured variation with altitude is inconsistent with a model proposed by Eke et al. [3], who claimed that the signal measured in collimation would be minimal. The decrease with altitude can be modeled as a linear combination of lunar neutrons detected in collimation, plus a contribution from neutron fluence induced in the bulk of the LRO spacecraft by galactic cosmic ray (GCR) spallation, plus a contribution from lunar neutrons detected out of collimation by penetration through the walls of the collimator. The fraction of detected neutrons in collimation and out of collimation is consistent with results from several other lines of evidence.  References: [1] Mitrofanov, I. G., et al. (2010). SSRv 150, 183-207. [2] Litvak, M. L. et al. (2012). JGR-Planets 117, E00H32. [3] Eke, V. R. et al. (2012). Astrophys. J. 747, 6. 2592.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
