 A New Plasma Drilling Technology with Applications for Moon, Asteroid, and Mars Exploration and ISRU.  B. W. Johansen1,2, P. Lee2,3,4, K. Naesje1, W. Lekens1, Per H. Sorensen1, O. Wetteland1, Brian Glass4, Christopher Hoftun2, and Kris Zacny5. 1Zaptec Inc., Stavanger, Norway, bwj@zaptec.no, 2Mars Institute, 3SETI Institute, 4NASA Ames Research Center, 5Honeybee Robotics.   Summary: A new plasma drilling technology is under development that will enable deep subsurface access, exploration, and sampling for science and ISRU on the Moon, asteroids, Mars, and its moons. Introduction: Future steps in the exploration of the Moon, asteroids, Mars, and its two satellites, Phobos and Deimos, will require access to the subsurface for in-situ science investigations, exploration, sampling, and in-situ resource utilization (ISRU). The emplacement of subsurface devices (instruments, anchors, explosive charges, etc.) might also be needed. Traditional drilling techniques used on Earth are difficult to apply in space, generally because of their prohibitive requirements in equipment mass, volume, and power, and their common reliance on gravity and on the continuous circulation of a liquid H2O-based drilling fluids. While dry shallow drilling (down to depths of a few meters) can be contemplated in the context of robotic missions [1], traditional deep drilling appears prohibitively expensive, even in the context of human missions. We present here a new plasma drilling technology and approach developed by the Zaptec, Inc. company to achieve practical, affordable, and reliable deepdrilling on the Moon, asteroids, Mars, and its moons. The drilling system comprises a freely advancing drill head or mole tethered by a power cable to a power source topside. The drill advances by generating a high-energy density plasma at the drill head which breaks down and pulverizes the target rock. A key enabling technology is the system's ability to deliver high energy plasma discharges via low mass, low volume power transformers located in the drill head section. Powder cuttings may be removed by circulating compressed CO2. On asteroids and on the moons of Mars, the system will reach 50 to 100 m depths with less than 250 kg of gear topside and 1 kW of peak power [Fig.1]. On Mars, the system will allow a depth of 2 km to be reached with less than 1 metric ton of surface payload housed in a SpaceX Dragon-sized capsule and peak power requirements of less than 2 kW. Applications: Accessing the subsurface of planetary bodies is an important capability for planetary exploration and eventual resource utilization, because the interior of planetary bodies presents us with environments that have been less, or not at all, exposed to surface alteration and its dynamic processes. On the Moon, the subsurface in the polar regions may be a repository of volatiles of value to science and as a potential resource for future human exploration. On asteroids, the subsurface may yield pristine asteroidal materials and potential resources for human exploration as well. The moons of Mars, Phobos and Deimos, are expected to present similar opportunities.   Figure 1: Zaptec plasma drill exploring an asteroid or one of the moons of Mars. (Zaptec Inc.)  On Mars, the subsurface might hold records of potential past life on Mars that might be better preserved than at the surface of Mars itself. Also, the H2O icerich subsurface on Mars likely transitions to liquid H2O-rich aquifers at greater depth, which might offer habitats for potential extant life on Mars. The depth to liquid aquifers on Mars is estimated to range from a few tens of meters (if briny solutions are involved and/or in potentially active volcanic areas presenting elevated geothermal gradients) to a few kilometers. Hoftun et al. (2014) summarize deep drilling rationales and challenges on Mars, and suggest that liquid aquifers might be reached at depths of less than 1 to 2 km beneath the floor of Valles Marineris and in recently active volcanic provinces [2]. Reaching deep liquid H2O on Mars and searching for life in this subsurface environment may be considered a "holy grail" objective for astrobiology. References: [1] Glass, B. and P. Lee (2013). Analog Sites for Mars Missions II, #4039. [2] Hoftun et al. (2014) Deep drilling on Mars: Review and Recommendations. Mars Inst. Tech Pub. 2014-001. 