2595.PDF
STREAK LENGTHENING IN CHI (°χ) FROM MICRO-X-RAY DIFFRACTION PATTERNS OF SHOCKED LUNAR AND TERRESTRIAL PLAGIOCLASE.  A. E. Pickersgill1,2, R. L. Flemming1,2, and G. R. Osinski1,2,3, 1 Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration; 2 Dept. of Earth Sciences; 3 Dept. of Physics and Astronomy; All at Western University, 1151 Richmond Street, London, ON, Canada (apickers@uwo.ca).  Introduction:  Studies of shock effects in feldspar group minerals have been limited due to the complexity of the crystal structure and the comparatively rapid rate at which feldspars weather, making them difficult to study using conventional optical techniques. As a result, feldspar is often ignored in favour of the optically more simple quartz for use as a shock barometer. As a result, the shock scale for feldspar is limited, and purely qualitative [e.g., 1 and references therein]. However, understanding and accurately measuring shock effects in feldspars is important when rocks contain little or no quartz, as is often the case in planetary studies and meteoritics. Sample Collection: Terrestrial samples of shocked impactites were collected over the course of two field seasons (2010-11) from a range of locations throughout the Mistastin Lake impact structure, central Labrador, Canada: the central uplift, the crater floor, ejecta deposits, terraces, and the rim. The presence of anorthosite in the target rock at Mistastin Lake [2] makes the impact structure an excellent scientific lunar analogue given that anorthosite is the main constituent of the lunar highlands. Lunar samples were down selected from those returned from Apollo missions 11, 12, and 15-17, based on proportion of plagioclase contained within each thin section.  Petrography and µXRD: Polished thin sections were studied by petrographic microscope for optical determination of shock level. They were then examined using in situ micro-X-ray diffraction (µXRD) on a Bruker D8 Discover (Co radiation), to identify phases, and correlate optically-derived shock stage to streak length along the Debye rings (χ) in General Area Detector Diffraction System (GADDS) 2D images (Fig. 1A). This is a relatively new technique for quantifying crystal deformation [3], which has successfully been applied to pyroxenes, [4], olivine [5, 6] and zircon [7] but not previously to any type of feldspar. It has been shown to be an early indicator of strain-related mosaicity (subgrain misorientations) before deformation appears optically [4, 6] which is particularly useful at the low end of the pressure scale in which feldspars are thought to deform more readily than many other minerals. Results: Optical metamorphic effects. The majority of grains examined in both sample suites show fracturing to varying degrees, from fully coherent to pulverized. For the purposes of this study grains below ~300 µm were ignored due to the beam size of the     Fig. 1: A. Two-dimensional GADDS image of a grain in Apollo sample 73215,193. Bright areas indicate constructive interference of X-rays diffracting off a crystal. The streak highlighted by the curved blue box is the result of non-uniform strain (and misorientation) along the (-202) lattice plane. By integrating intensity in 2θ (short axis of the box) relative to mosaic spread in χ (long axis of the box) a plot can be produced of the lineshape as a function of χ. B. A smoothed (to reduce noise) version of the plot from part A, showing the FWHM measured (in °χ) to assign a numerical value to mineral deformation.   µXRD; as a result the heavily pulverized samples were excluded. Samples were divided into four groups based on optical properties ranging from no apparent deforIntensity [Lin (Counts)]0246810Chi  - Scale-89 -80 -70A B 2595.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
mation to high deformation. Group A is grains exhibiting uniform extinction. Group B is grains exhibiting slight degrees of undulatory extinction. Group C exhibits standard undulatory extinction. Group D exhibits undulatory extinction and reduced birefringence. Group E is grains which have partially become isotropic.  Except for samples from the rim of the Mistastin Lake structure crystals showed varying degrees of undulatory extinction (the angular difference between when the first part of a grain goes extinct and when the last part of the grain goes extinct varies from only a few degrees to several tens of degrees). Often grains within a single sample showed variation despite presumably having been exposed to similar pressures during impact. Only two grains were observed to demonstrate reduced birefringence, though further studies will undoubtedly uncover more. These grains exhibit features attributed to shock level I, 10-35 GPa, [8]. Diaplectic feldspar glass was observed in one lunar sample and in samples from the terraces and inner part of the rim of the Mistastin Lake structure, however as it results in an amorphous µXRD pattern, measuring of streak length in fully isotropic grains is not possible. These grains represent the highest shock level observed prior to melting (level II, ~35-45 GPa according to [8]). Micro-X-ray diffraction. GADDS images showed highly variable streak lengths across samples, with streak length increasing with increasing optical evidence of deformation (such as higher degrees of undulatory extinction and the onset of diaplectic glass in part of a grain).  Fig. 2 is a graph of measured full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of integrated streak length (in °χ) vs the degree of deformation visible in thin section. In Fig. 2, a correlation between increased streak length and higher shock level is apparent. It is also apparent however that the range of streak lengths (FWHM) associated with grains exhibiting undulatory extinction is quite large, and it would therefore likely be possible to subdivide this group into even smaller segments based on the degree of undulosity. The highest FWHM observed were from the lunar samples, likely a combination of higher cratering rate and better preservation of more highly shocked lunar materials as compared to those on Earth. Discussion: Given the wide range of streak lengths which occur in samples which all fall under shock  level I, it is apparent that streak length will be a useful mechanism by which to subdivide the lower end of the shock scale. In addition it will be useful to develop an optic means of describing the level of undulatory extinction of a sample to facilitate faster interpretation of pressure histories. Unfortunately the lack of samples displaying reduced birefringence has left a large gap in our data, and future efforts will pay particular heed to identifying these grains in order to measure streak lengths and fill in that data gap. As is, the two samples shown are not illustrative of any particular trends.  Fig. 2, Graph of measured FWHM of integrated streak length in chi (mosaic spread – °χ) vs the degree of deformation visible in thin section (optical group). Colours represent Miller indices as illustrated. Square symbols (■) are lunar samples; triangles (▲) are terrestrial samples. Visible deformation has been divided into 5 optical groups: A-uniform extinction; B-slight undulatory extinction; C-undulatory extinction; Dreduced birefringence; E-part of grain is isotropic. Shock level according to [8] is also indicated.   References: [1] French B. M. (1998) LPI Contribution 954, 120 pp. [2] Currie K. L. (1971) Bul. - GSC. 207:62. [3] Flemming, R. L. (2007) Can. J. Earth Sci. 44: 1333-1346. [4] Izawa et al. (2011) MAPS 46 (5): 638-651. [5] McCausland et al. (2012) Can. J. Earth Sci. 50: 1-12. [6] Vinet et al. (2011) Am. Mineral. 96 (4): 486-497. [7] Moser et al. (2009) EPSL 277: 73-79. [8] Stöffler D. (1971) J. Geophys. Res. 79:5541-5551  Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Canadian Space Agency, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and Indian and Northern Affair’s Northern Scientific Training Program (NSTP). In addition we would like to thank Marianne Mader, Cassandra Marion, Marc Beauchamp, and Alaura Singleton for their support in the field and in the lab, as well as the members of CAPTEM and the staff of the Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility for their assistance in acquiring the Apollo samples used in this work. 012345670 1 2 3 4 5Mosaic Spread (°χ)(-202)(004)(-314)(1-52)(42-4)(0-64)(53-6)(2-73)Optical Group     A        B        C        D         E Shock level      └ 0 ┘ └────── I ──────┘ 2595.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
