2606.PDF
TEXTURAL COMPARISON BETWEEN POPIGAI AND RIES IMPACT MELT-BEARING BRECCIAS  A. Chanou1, R. A. F. Grieve1, and G. R. Osinski1,2. 1Department of Earth Sciences & Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. (achanou@uwo.ca)  Introduction: Popigai and Ries are both complex impact structures formed in mixed target lithologies with diameters of ~100 and ~26 km, respectively. Here, we present the results of textural analysis and comparison of the properties of the vitric clast fraction in impact melt-bearing breccias from both structures. The vitric clasts are of impact-melt origin and vary in abundance, size and shape. This variation is reflective of their environment and mechanisms of formation and emplacement. Comparison between the vitric clasts in breccias of the two craters demonstrates a similarity in basic physical characteristics that can be projected to a similarity of formational processes. Semi-automated digital image analysis of breccia hand samples produced sufficient textural information to define the similarities, as well as the differences, between the two sample sets and the internal variation in physical characteristics of the breccias within a single crater.  Methodology: Hand samples of ~15 impact meltbearing breccias from both Popigai and Ries impact structures were sliced, polished and then scanned on a flattop scanner. For the textural analysis of the images a semi-automated methodology [1] was applied with the use of ImageJ software [2]. Particle analysis results include shape complexity and particle sorting. Particles of interest for the scope of this study were confined to the clastic fraction of the breccia composed of vitric particles of impact-melt origin.  Samples: Popigai samples are mainly ‘surficial’ impact melt-bearing breccias from above the impactmelt sheet. Ries samples are also ‘surficial’ or socalled ‘outer’ suevite [3] and include several samples from the Wörnitzostheim core. The rock description of impact melt-bearing breccias is used here to refer to any impactite that is or appears to be brecciated and a fraction of its clastic load is composed of vitric clasts. In order to highlight the textural similarities in the vitric clasts from the two structures, as described by the graphical products of the image analyses, we compared the results with other melt-bearing breccias from the Sandcherry member of the Onaping Formation at the Sudbury impact structure. The latter has been hypothesized [4] as the product of the same formational processes as most recently suggested for the meltbearing breccias (suevites) from the Ries [3,5].  Results: Shape complexity – Due to their impactmelt origin, vitric clasts acquire and commonly preserve irregular shapes indicative of their once molten and, thus, ductiley deforming state. Nevertheless, extensive reprocessing of this clastic component can result to reduction or even elimination of these complex irregular shapes. Shape complexity can be described by the average fractal box counting dimension of the shape in question.     Figure 1: Example of the similarity with regards to shape complexity in both the Popigai and Ries impact melt-bearing breccias. From the two Popigai samples (97AV-59 and 97AV-44) it is evident that internal variability (or intra-crater variability) is also present. All three samples show a wide range of DB values with fractions on the mid and high-end values (e.g., over 1.25). Sample Wör_43.8 is from the Wörnitzostheim core from the Ries impact structure. The average box counting (DB) frequency distributions are displayed with an offset of 20%.  The higher the box counting dimension, the more complex are the clast shapes.   Figure 2: Example of several Popigai and Ries impact meltbearing breccias (coloured lines) compared to the Onaping, Sandcherry member sample (black dashed line). The contrast is evident in both that the Onaping sample displays an almost unimodal distribution, where the bulk of its vitric clasts are 2606.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
of approximately the same box counting dimension (DB) (i.e., approximately DB=1.06). At the same time, Onaping lacks any of the higher complexly shaped clasts (i.e., frequency of higher box counting dimension) that are apparent in all of the other samples.   Sorting – Both the Popigai and Ries impact meltbearing breccias show an overall poorly to very poorly sorted vitric clastic component. Sorting is graphically shown by the cumulative perimeter fraction against the cumulative area fraction. The slope and degree of discontinuity of the data reflects the sorting level of the sample. Steeper slopes and discontinuities are indicators of poorer sorting. Sorting is indicative of the transportation mode and duration.     Figure 3: Plot displaying the different sorting levels of Popigai (i.e., 97AV-31-2, 97AV-59 and 97AV-44), Ries (i.e., Wör_43.8 and Wör_42.9-43.0) and Onaping samples. There is a clear contrast between the sorting grade of Onaping and everything else. The Sandcherry member sample shows a continuous and smoother slope that is representative of a well to very well sorted rock. This contrast highlights the similarity between the Ries and Popigai impact melt-bearing breccias.   Discussion: Impact melt-bearing breccias from both Popigai and Ries impact structures display certain common physical characteristics. Vitric clasts in these impactites show a wide range of shapes that are overall more complex and irregular (Fig.1). This similarity is further highlighted by the comparison (and contrast) to impact melt-bearing breccias of the Sandcherry member, from the Onaping Formation, Sudbury impact structure. The Sandcherry breccia shows a significantly different profile of vitric clast shapes with a more uniform distribution. The unimodal distribution of the Onaping breccias has a maximum closer to the lower end of the average box counting dimension (Fig.2). Vitric clasts in the Onaping samples have less complex shapes and appear more uniform. In addition, both the Wörnitzostheim and Popigai breccias have a poorly sorted vitric clastic fraction. With discontinuous and steep sloping distributions that reflect jumps in particle sizes as well as a steeply increasing rate of the cumulative perimeter relative to the cumulative area. Furthermore, Sandcherry member impact melt-bearing breccias contrast with the physical similarities of the Popigai and Ries breccias through its very well sorted vitric clast population. The Onaping breccias show a continuous distribution and a slope closer to unity. Conclusions: Digital image analysis of impact meltbearing breccias from Popigai and Ries impact structures shows physical similarities with regard to their vitric clastic component. Vitric clasts are of impactmelt origin and their once ductile state can record deformation events that happened due to, either their initial formation, transportation and/or emplacement. As a result, physical similarities within the vitric clastic component may project similarity of formational processes. In the same framework, some textural differences can reflect localized conditions within a single crater, while major differences (e.g., contrast relative to the Onaping breccias) describe different formational and emplacement processes.  The initial results of this study would, therefore, appear at odds with the conclusion [3,5] that the vitric-bearing breccias at the Ries had the same formational history as the vitric-bearing breccias of the Onaping Formation at Sudbury [4]. Acknowledgements: We thank Doreen Ames for providing samples from the Popigai impact structure and Gisela Pösges of the Rieskratermuseum, Nördlingen, is thanked for providing loan of the Wörnitzostheim drill core samples. This research was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the Canadian Space Agency, and MDA, through a research chair and grants to GRO. References:  [1] Chanou et al. (2014) MAPS (in press) [2] Rasband, W.S., ImageJ, U. S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/  (1997-2014) [3] Stöffler et al. (2013) MAPS 48, 515–589. [4] Grieve et al. (2010) MAPS 45 759-782 [5] Artemieva et al. (2013) MAPS 48, 590-627.  2606.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
