2617.PDF
ANALYSIS AND CHRONOSTRATIGRAPHIC IMPLICATIONS OF LUNAR SOURCE-TOSECONDARY IMPACT RELATIONSHIPS: TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT AND FEATURE MAPPING. J.A. Skinner, Jr.1, J.R. Laura1,2, C.M. Fortezzo1, J.J. Hagerty1, T.M. Hare1, and R.K. Hayward1. 1Astrogeology Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, 2255 N. Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001, (jskinner@usgs.gov), 2School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University, 975 S. Myrtle Ave., Tempe, AZ 85287.   Introduction: The lunar surface is a archetype for cratering processes, wherein rock units and cross cutting relationships provide physical and temporal constraints for the evolution of the Moon [1]. Along with primary craters, secondary landforms are produced both proximal and distal to primary (source) craters through the fragmentation and ejection of target material (Fig. 1). The majority of secondary landforms on rocky bodies of the inner Solar System likely formed through two end member scenarios: (1) atmospheric breakup of weak, stony meteoroids, or (2) the highvelocity ejection of large blocks from the surface as secondary debris from primary impacts [2-5]. The morphology and morphometry of the resultant debris field varies based on the size and rotational characteristics of the target body, strength of both the impactor and target, and the speed and angle of the impactor with regard to the planetary surface [2-7].   Figure 1. Examples of secondary crater landforms on the Moon. (A) Elongate groove. (B) Crater cluster. (C) Catenae (crater chain). (D) Lineated terrain.  The stratigraphic framework for the Moon is based on crater size-frequency statistics as well as crosscutting relationships between key impacts and their resulting rocks units and landforms [1]. However, there has been no modern, comprehensive assessment of the fidelity of source-secondary alignment despite the fact that such relationships are a cornerstone of lunar chronostratigraphy. We present technical development and preliminary feature mapping results for using large crater clusters (LCCs) and associated landforms (Fig. 1) to (1) identify potential sourcesecondary relationships, and (2) refine relative age assignments for currently mapped geologic units on the Moon. Technical Development: In 2008, we developed a three-step analytical toolset in Visual Basic.NET to be used as a plug-in to the Environmental Systems Research Institute (Esri) ArcGIS 9.3 software package [89]. Step 1 provides clustering and directional distribution analyses of “mass-mapped” point features. Step 2 calculates trajectories of statistical clusters as great circles. Step 3 identifies statistical clusters of intersected trajectories. The user is prompted for inputs at each step, including nearest-neighbor distance for cluster identification, points per cluster, minimum cluster ellipticity, and a counter-effect for the Coriolis force (using average ejecta velocity). The original tool was posted on USGS and Esri websites in January 2011. Though we established that the existing toolset is analytically effective [8-9], we have recently addressed functional limitations due not only to excessive computational times when using large point data sets but also to incompatibilities with subsequent ArcGIS versions. In addition, previous performance tests highlighted a need to analyze mapped lines (defining the long axis of elongated clusters) in addition to (or instead of) mapped points (defining individual craters that comprise each cluster). As such, we have upgraded the existing toolset in order to include the following:  Increased computational efficiency via  indexing nearest neighbor statistics prior to Step 1 analyses;  Modified clustering and trajectory intersection tools (Steps 1 and 3) using density-based clustering of applications with noise methods to increase sensitivity to cluster shape and count;  Optional “optimization” button for each tool to avoid reliance on outputted text files;  Input of points and polylines as well as compatibility with shapefile and geodatabase formats;  Use of polyline files in trajectory analyses (Step 2), which allows the user to effectively skip Step 1;  Optional “save log” with specified location;  Detailed help documentation as PDF and HTML.  Upgraded to ArcGIS 10.x. 2617.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
These efforts yield a statistically robust toolset for assessing spatial linkage between secondary crater clusters and related landforms with primary sources.  Feature Mapping: Analytical accuracy is as sensitive to the technical approach as it is to the feature mapping approach. With this in mind, we are currently mapping the location of crater clusters, catenae, grooves, and lineated terrain (Fig. 1). The base image for feature mapping is the LROC WAC mosaic (100 m/px). We are augmenting the map base with Clementine multi-band mosaics, Lunar Orbiter mosaics, and LOLA digital elevation models, which collectively provide variable spectral wavelengths and lighting conditions that are necessary for cross-comparison and quality checking. We employ two scale-based approaches to mapping in order to assess a “best practice” approach for consistent complete feature mapping. The first approach relies on mapping at three increasingly smaller scales (larger areas): 1:1M, 1:2M, and 1:5M. The second approach relies on using the opposite order for mapping. We use ArcGIS to digitally map relevant secondary features using prepopulated attributes in equatorial and polar projections. Performance Testing: We are conducting performance tests for the technical and mapping approaches. These tests are being conducted in tandem with toolset refinements as well as global mapping. Systematically changing input features and toolset parameters provides not only a test of operational effectiveness, but also guides subsequent iterations in search of source craters. Changing the mapping parameters – including the digitizing scale and feature attribution – provides an opportunity to examine the minimum size and type that can yield meaningful source-secondary results.  Global mapping. To date, we have identified 4989 secondary landforms, which are classified into one of four often overlapping types of landforms: clusters (n=1,441), catenae (n=2,574), grooves (n=585), and lineated terrain (n=389). Preliminary results indicate that the 1:1M1:5M approach tends to include features that are smaller than the intended minimum length of 20 km. We are currently quality checking, refining, and testing this preliminary global data set using alternate base scales and existing toolsets. In particular, we are comparing scale-based mapping approaches in order to help us identify the range of features that are most relevant for assessing global source-secondary relationships. Points vs. lines. The 2008 toolset was originally designed to identify statistical clusters within a data set of mapped points representing hundreds to thousands of small-diameter secondary craters. Though this approach was effective for small volumes of points, it lacked the computational finesse to use large volumes of points. It also ignored the use of lines mapped along the axes of large, well-defined elongate features (clusters, catenae, and lineated terrain), which we find provides a higher level of accuracy in the determination of potential sources, particularly at large distances. The current version of the analytical toolset allows the use of lines to assess source-secondary relationships. Impact craters. For simple to complex lunar craters, we used clusters and rays around Copernicus crater, which has served as a referent for the lunar chronostratigraphic system. We mapped 35 clusters located in mare units around Copernicus crater as points using the Lunar Orbiter and Clementine (750 nm) “blended” mosaic. These included clusters within bright rays located between Copernicus and both Aristarchus and Kepler craters (as a means to assess the tool’s ability to resolve different source regions). In addition, we mapped several clusters that display key cross-cutting relationships with surrounding landforms, such as Euler crater. Using “optimized” parameters, the toolset identified a first-rank source as a location 24 km from the true center of Copernicus. Several modeled trajectories intersected both Aristarchus and Kepler craters, illustrating first-order ability to partition overlapping clusters. Impact basins. To examine our ability to identify lunar impact basins, we mapped the dominant orientations of  highland lineations (n=39) and catenae (n=20) located on various terrains on the lunar near-side. Optimized parameters resulted in the identification of Imbrium, Orientale, and Humorum as first-, second-, and third-rank source regions, respectively. These tests illustrate that (1) the tool not only works for features at multiple scales but also that statistical ranking capabilities are functional, (2) there are analytical limitations when only using features within certain spatial quadrants, and (3) statistical relationships often require visual examination to establish confidence in results, particularly for very ancient (stratigraphically obscured) lineations and basins.  Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NASA’s Lunar Advanced Science and Exploration Research (LASER) Program No. NNH12AU54I (PI Skinner). References: [1] Wilhelms D.E. (1987) USGS Professional Paper 1348. [2] Hartmann W.K. (1969) Icarus, 10, 201-213. [3] Holsapple K.A. and Schmidt R.M. (1982) JGR, 87, 1849-1870. [4] Vickery A.M. (1986) Icarus, 67, 224-236. [5] Popova O.P., et al. (2007), Icarus, 190, 50-73. [6] Tanaka K.L. et al. (2005), USGS SIM 2888. [7] Robbins S.J. and B.M. Hynek (2011), JGR, 116, E10003. [8] Nava R.A. and Skinner, J.A. Jr. (2009) AGU Fall Suppl., P23A-1243. [9] Nava R.A. and Skinner J.A., Jr. (2010) LPS XLI, Abstract #2699. 2617.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
