2635.PDF
DEVELOPMENT OF AN X-RAY MICROCALORIMETER FOR SPECTROSCOPIC IMAGING AND TRACE ELEMENT ANALYSIS OF COMETARY AND INTERSTELLAR PARTICLES RETURNED BY STARDUST*.  E. Silver1, T. Lin1, E. P. Vicenzi2, A. J. Westphal3, J. Beeman4, and E.E. Haller4, 1HarvardSmithsonian Center For Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street Cambridge, MA 02138, 2 Museum Conservation Institute, Smithsonian Institution, Suitland, MD 20746,  3 Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, 4Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720.  Introduction: To advance the chemical analysis of cometary particles and interstellar dust returned by STARDUST, we are using a cryogenic microcalorimeter spectrometer originally developed for measuring xray spectra from astrophysical sources. The microcalorimeter is used in conjunction with an environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) in the laboratory at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) and with the synchrotron at the Advance Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Here we review our work to date in preparing the microcalorimeter for trace element measurements of cometary and interstellar particles returned by the Stardust mission. We also demonstrate a new capability to detect the chemical shifts in oxidized compounds relevant to STARDUST particle chemistry.   X-Ray Analysis and Detection of Trace Elements: A measurement of the siderophile elemental abundance pattern in cometary metal particles would be a very effective diagnostic of their origin.  The siderophile elements Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Ga, Ge, As, Mo, Ru, Rh, Pd, Sn, Sb, W, Re, Os, Ir, Pt, and Au are so defined because they are strongly concentrated in the metallic phases of meteorites; they either condensed during the nebular condensation stage or partitioned into metal phases during the equilibration of metals and silicates within planetary bodies [1]. The elemental ratios of the elements relative to Fe should tell us if a given metal  is a nebular condensate, from the core of a differentiated body and/or formed via impact melt processing. Since large metal particles are relatively rare in chondritic-porous interstellar dust particles (CP-IDPs)[2], which are thought to originate in comets, findings on these metals could indicate an origin for CP-IDPs distinct from Jupiter-family comets like 81P/Wild2 [3]; it may also indicate radial structure in comets [4].      To prepare for the analysis of cometary partciles, we have performed a detailed spectroscopic imaging study of a small, round, anomalously reflective, tin-white grain on a piece of the Nantan meteorite; the diameter of this grain is about 0.5mm.  The Nantan meteorite is a class IIICD iron meteorite and is predominantly composed of kamacite. We conducted 2-dimensional X-ray spectroscopic mapping on a 100 micron by 80 micron area which includes the main phase and plateshaped inclusions. Although the microcalorimeter's superior energy resolution compared to conventional energy dispersive (EDS) detectors offers significant capabilities for trace element detection, electroninduced Bremsstrahlung background still limits the microcalorimeter's sensitivity to roughly 10 - 20 ppm. Sub-1 ppm sensitivity is required to detect the heavy trace elements such as Re, Os, Ir, Pt and Au if they are present at cosmic abundances.  To measure siderophile abundances at levels of ≤1 ppm  in cometary metals, it is significantly more efficient to irradiate with x-rays, rather than electrons, since x-ray fluorescence measurements are not subject to the Bremsstrahlung limitations of the ESEM experiments. We present simulations of what we anticipate observing during our upcoming experimental campaign at the ALS.    The Microcalorimeter and Chemical State Determination: The x-ray spectroscopy studies of cometary particles and ISP would be significantly enriched if the microcalorimeter could determine not only the chemical composition, but also the oxidation state of an element bound in a compound. We report initial spectral measurements of manganese (Mn) and several of its oxidation states that show the expected variation in xray line profiles and the subtle shifts in peak energies, the tell-tale signs that chemical bonds holding the atoms to their nearest neighbors perturb the atomic structure of the element. Unlike wavelength dispersive spectroscopy, the microcalorimeter has the advantage of high spectral resolution plus effective parallel detection of X-rays at relatively low electron beam currents. Although the microcalorimeter does not have the inherent spectral resolution to detect bonding environment (<1.5 eV), we have learned that it can differentiate among some element species (e.g. Mn) by carefully fitting peak centroids. With a nominal energy resolution of 5 eV [5] and a sufficient number of counts in the measured x-ray emission lines, it is possible to use the microcalorimeter to determine the peak energies of the centroids to better than 1.5 eV.  References:  [1] Chou,C.-L., Proc. Lunar Planet.Sci.Conf. 9th , 219 (1978) [2] Kong, P. & Ebihara, M. (1997) GCA 61, 2317 2635.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
[3]Westphal, A. J. The 75th Annual Meeting of the Meteoritical Society, Cairns Australia, 12 - 17 August 2012, MAPS A75, 5309 (2012). [4] Ogliore R. C. et al. (2012) ApJ Lett. 745, 19 [5] Silver, E., et al., Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2005,545, 3, 21, 683-689 . * This research was supported by NASA Contract NNX13AG62G. The aid of Gerald Austin, David Caldwell, Don Landis and Norm Madden is gratefully acknowledged.  2635.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
