2639.PDF
The Transfer of Energy Through Sand.  J. S. Chang1, K. VonZabern2, M. Rubin3, H. Wathore4 J. Matthew5, and A. Garcia6. 1Durham Academy, Durham, NC (15chang@da.org), 2Durham Academy, Durham, NC, 3Durham Academy, Durham, NC, 4Apex High School, Apex, NC, 5Durham School of the Arts, Durham, NC, 6Northern Durham High School, Durham, NC   Introduction:  Understanding the geological properties of Mars is becoming an ever more prevalent topic in the scientific community. Earth and Mars replicate one another, sharing a similar geologic composition, the main difference being Earth's seismic activity. Knowing how energy is transferred through sediments can help us study the thermal properties of the Martian surface.  Considering the complications and expenses with current technology, it is very problematic to send rovers to Mars. However, by analyzing the heating and cooling curves created from data collected by thermistors, it is possible to learn how energy transfers through the sediments on Mars's surface, which could aid in picking potential landing sites for rovers in the future .  Additionally, the experiment simulated an average winter day on mars. On Mars, winter days are approximately 8 hours while nights are approximately 16 hours and 37 minutes. In this experiment, the sand was heated for 1.5 hours and cooled for 3 hours; these heating and cooling times are roughly proportional to the heating and cooling times of Mars' terrain. The heating and cooling curves depict the transfer of energy through a sediment and how depth affects it.  Therefore, the objective of this experiment was to model the the transfer of energy through sand. Based on Newton's Laws of Cooling it was predicted that the transfer of energy through the sand will decrease exponentially as it gets deeper.  Methods:  Sediment samples were collected from a deposit in the Eno River in North Carolina. The sediment was put through two strainers in order to separate the sand and gravel with a mesh strainer at 4 mm and 40 mm respectively. The sediments were each placed into separate containers and dehydrated in an oven. The sediments were then left to cool to room temperature. Inexpensive Thermistors were bought and soldered onto copper wires then placed inside the body of a pen to create cheap durable thermometers that were used as probes. Six probes were attached to a GUI and coded in arduino C++. Using the Arduino software, a program was created to use the probes to measure and record the temperature.         The sand sediment was then placed in a white plastic cylindrical container with a radius of 13 cm to a height of 12 cm while placing the probes 2 cm apart starting from the surface. The probes were placed at depths of 10 cm, 8 cm, 6 cm, 4 cm, 2 cm, and 0 cm with all thermometer heads placed at the center of the sample. The fine sand sediment was then placed 57 cm directly under a 630 watts/m2 heat lamp (seen in Figure 1). The heat lamp was turned on while the probes began collecting temperature readings every 15 seconds for 270 minutes, 90 minutes heating, and 180 minutes cooling. The probes would take the temperature of the sand every 15 seconds. The times and the temperatures would then be graphed.         Results:  Below are the heating and cooling curves of the sand sediment. The temperature in Celsius is the vertical axis while the time in seconds  is the horizontal axis. The different lines represent the different probes. On the right of each graph shows which line represents which depth. Both curves follow an exponential lines.   2639.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
   Analysis: As expected, the temperature increased and decreased quicker at smaller depths. The deeper the probes were, the longer it took for the sand to heat and cool. This is due to the amount of energy the sand was receiving at each depth. The heat lamp was the source of the energy giving heat energy directly to the top of the sand. The particles of sand on the top layer of the sample would receive all of the heat energy first, and the sand particles below the top layer would indirectly receive energy transferred from the top layer. However, not all the energy that the top layer received would continue to move down. Some of the heat energy the top received would remain in the top layers and only some energy would continue to move downwards. In the cooling curve of the uncompressed data, it is seen that the top probe does not experience a clear curve. Instead, the cooling curve of probe T0 follows a very regular patterned up and down shape which starts around 30 minutes. This unusual shape can be attributed to the air conditioning patterns of the room. Since probe T0 was on the top of the sand, it experienced the temperature changes in the room due to the air conditioning, while the deeper probes did not. Another noticeable feature of the cooling curve is that all probes but the top continued to experience a rise in temperature, even though the heat lamp was turned off. This is because the heat energy from the lamp was still continuing to move down the bucket. Therefore the probes would continue to experience a rise in temperature until there was no more energy moving through the area it was in. The probe on the bottom continued to increase in temperature for the longest time. Both the heating and the cooling curves of all depths follow Newton's Law for Cooling. The law states that T2 = T0 + (T1 - T0) * e(-k * Δt), where T2 is final temperature, T0 is ambient temperature, T1 is initial temperature, and Δt is the change in time between T1 and T2. T0 and T1 are the same for the heating and cooling curves of all depths. Δt and T2 are the independent and dependent variables, respectively. Therefore the only component of the equation that is different for each depth is the k constant. The equations for each heating and cooling curve was found, and it was observed that at deeper depths, the k constant was higher. The k constant decreased as the absolute value of the rate of temperature change increased.While the k constant has no units, it can be concluded that there is a correlation with the depth of the sediment and the value of k.  Future Study:  To further understand the nature of the heating and cooling of the surface of Mars, the same experiment can be done on different materials, such as gravel. Another alternative would be to conduct the same experiment on a mix of elements, which would be a better simulation of the real martian surface.   Acknowledgements:  This experiment was performed by MONS (Mars Outreach for North Carolina Students). We would like to thank our mentor Dr. Jeff Moersh of the University of Tennessee, who helped aid us in our experimental design. Thanks also go to Howard Lineberger, Sam Fuerst, and Charles Payne along with Zach Zweig-Vinegar and Zach Zebley, provided endless guidance throughout the program. Special thanks to Meg McNall for her help on the mathatical analyzation of he data. Finally, without the generous support of our sponsor, The Burroughs Wellcome Fund of Research, we would not have been capable of conducting our experiment(s). Without these people, we would not have been able to participate in this program that both enriches our knowledge and interest in the science realm.  References: Quick Facts. (n.d.). Mars Exploration Program:. Retrieved December 20, 2013, from http://mars.nasa.gov/allaboutmars/extreme/quickfacts/. Other differential equations. (n.d.). Newton's Law of Cooling. Retrieved December 20, 2013, from http://www.ugrad.math.ubc.ca/coursedoc/math100/notes/diffeqs/cool.html 2639.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
