 THE INFLUENCE OF EVAPORATION FRONTS ON THE GLOBAL EVOLUTION OF SOLIDS AND GAS IN THE PROTOPLANETARY NEBULA. P. R. Estrada1 and J. N. Cuzzi2, 1 Carl Sagan Center, SETI Institute, Mountain View CA 94043, USA, (Paul.R.Estrada@nasa.gov), 2 NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94043, USA.. Introduction: The earliest stages of planet formation in the protoplanetary disk continues to be a topic of debate on many fronts. Apart from the basic question of how grain growth from dust to planetesimal occurs, observational contraints such as the formation ages of primitive meteorites [1-2], and the duration of "dusty-gas" protoplanetary nebulae [3] which can span millions of years (during which time the nebula significantly evolves) is painting an increasingly more complicated picture than previously considered. These observations are leading us away from the oversimplified view that planets grow within a static "minimum mass" nebula where the local temperature uniquely determines the chemistry through some invariable "cosmic abundance" in favor of a nebula in which mass concentration and composition evolves both locally and globally. This more dynamic picture leads us to explore the presence of evaporation fronts (EFs): a location in the disk where the temperature is such that phase changes between solids and vapor can occur. The treatment of EFs is required in order to self-consistently model a globally evolving nebula because inwardly migrating material can lose some or all of their "volatiles" while passing through them, and subsequently that vapor may diffuse outside the EF where it can recondense, leading to enhancements in both composition and fractional mass of solids. Because multiple EFs are expected throughout the disk, the transport of materials of different composition both locally and globally is possible. Here we model an early-stage disk from 10−1000 AU with an (water-ice) EF to demonstrate how compositional changes and transport can occur. Global Gas and Solids Evolution Model: The wide range in dynamical times associated with a protoplanetary disk that may extend to ∼ 1000 AU, along with the cumbersome implementation of the collisional coagulation equation, have previously restricted global models for the evolution of solids to either studying particle growth and redistribution alone [4-5], or studying compositional enhancements at EFs due to simplified assumptions about growth [6-7], or ones that treat growth more carefully, but neglect radial drift [8-9]. We have developed a parallelized 1+1D radial nebula code that is capable of simultaneously treating all of these elements in a thermally and dynamically evolving disk over its entire radial extent. Our model includes self-consistent growth and radial drift of material of all sizes, accounts for vertical diffusion and settling of smaller grains, radial diffusion of dust and vapor phases of multiple species, and a self-consistent calculation of opacity and disk temperature which allows us to track the evaporation and condensation of various species as they are transported throughout the disk. A detailed description of our code will appear elsewhere. Here, we briefly discuss those elements that describe the physics at EFs. Gas evolution under viscosity νT in our code is prescribed using analytical expressions from [10] which depend on initial disk mass and radius, and νT = αcH , where c is the gas sound speed, and H this disk scale height, and α can be varied over Figure 1: Upper panel: Total fractional mass of dust (red curves) and vapor (green curves) at three different times. Lower panel: Plot of the fractional mass of migrators (r > r∗). The total fraction of solids and volatiles is indicated by the black curve. See text. This simulation utilized 60 CPUs and 24 hours of dedicated wall time. an arbitrary range. The radial diffusion of the dust and vapor fractions of all compositional constituents is determined by solving the advection-diffusion equation in log space using an implicit finite differencing scheme. The vapor fraction advects with the gas, whereas the radial velocity of the dust is taken to be the mass density weighted mean velocity of all particles in the dust population which properly takes into account the radial drift of particles due to the local pressure gradient [11]. At every timestep, we self-consistently calculate the protoplanetary disk midplane and photosphere temperatures assuming disk heating is due to a combination of internal viscous dissipation (at a rate proportional to ΣνT , where Σ is the gas surface density), and a possibly time-dependent external illumination by the central star that heats the upper layer of the disk on both sides. The midplane temperature must be solved iteratively because the optical depth of the layer τ = κRΣ, where κR is the Rosseland mean opacity, depends on the particle size distribution, and the mass fraction of all compositional constituents, both which are evolving in time. Our method of calculating κR is described in [12]. Dust coagulation is treated using the moments method described in [13], which is valid up to some fragmentation size r∗ that depends on ambient nebular conditions, and assumed particle strengths. Beyond r∗, we follow the growth of particles explicitly, which we call "migrators", using a statistical algorithm. These migrators are subject to collisional disruption as they drift relatively large distances while they continue to grow from dust and potentially smaller migrators. Disrupted migrators are reintegrated back into the dust population. When a migrator passes through an EF, they are assumed to lose their volatile material to the local vapor inventory, and their masses and densities are adjusted accordingly.  EVOLUTION OF SOLIDS AND GAS, P. R. Estrada and J. N. Cuzzi Figure 2: Upper panel: Evolution of the mass surface density of gas (black curves), and solids (red curves) for three different times. Lower panel: Evolution of the midplane opacity. See text. Simulation of an EF: We have simulated a protoplanetary disk from 10− 1000 AU, with an initial disk mass of 0.2 M⊙ (M⊙ is a solar mass), for α = 5× 10−3. This initially places the outermost part of the water-ice EF near ∼ 15 − 20 AU. The model includes several species in cosmic abundance, all of which are solid outside the water-ice EF (which give an initial mean dust density of ρ0 ≃ 1.385 g cm−3). In Fig. 1 we plot the total fractional mass of dust (red) and vapor (green) in the upper panel, and migrators (magenta) in the lower panel at 104, 105 and 106 years of evolution. The initial distribution is indicated by the black, dot-dashed line which has an abrupt cutoff at 100 AU. For this α, the fragmentation barrier (r = r∗) is reached at small particles sizes, so migrators appear early and in significant number, which radially drift inward at different speeds. As this material encounters the EF (whose location can vary with time), its volatiles evaporate and diffuse outwards where they recondense. This leads to a drop in the fractional mass of migrators inside the EF. By 106 years, the ratio of gas to dust is approaching unity near the EF (though the gas density has significantly decreased at this location and time, see Fig. 2, upper panel). We also note an abrupt cutoff in the population of migrators developing even outside the EF region which is not because of evaporation. The lower mass end of the migrator population is effectively being removed because the higher bulk density of solids dramatically increases the probability of destruction for sizes r & r∗. This leads to a large increase in the dust fraction which is reflected in the large opacity as seen in Fig. 2 (lower panel). In Fig. 3 we show the mean dust and migrator particle densities, and particle radii after 106 years of evolution. The process of evaporation, diffusion and recondensation of more and more migrating material over time leads to a systematic enhancement in water-ice outside the EF while higher density material continues to drift inwards beyond the EF. After 106 years, the EF region and its vicinity is essentially pure waterice. Furthermore, this facilitates, through diffusion of dust outwards with the nebula gas, the enhancement of the entire outer disk in water ice. Figure 3: Plot of the mean dust and migrator particle densities (left axis, colored curves), and particle radii (right axis, black curves) after 10 6 years of evolution (cf. solid curves in Fig. 1 and 2). See text. The three particle sizes plotted in black in Fig. 3 as a function of semi-major axis are r∗ (dashed curve), the size of the largest migrator rL (dotted curve) and the migrator size 〈rL〉 where the bulk of the total mass is located (solid curve). 〈rL〉 ∼ r∗ over much of the disk because larger particles are most likely destroyed, but some do reach up to sizes rL in small numbers. These also happen to be the fastest migrators which can drift inwards and grow larger. By the time these particles reach the highly enhanced EF region, they are not easily fragmented (though smaller migrators are), and can potentially grow to much larger sizes. This explains the sharp increase in rL (up to as high as ∼ 20 m) and 〈rL〉 near 10 AU. Conclusions: We have found that the influence of an (waterice) EF can lead to (1) enhancements in fractional mass of solids by 1 − 2 orders of magnitude near the EF, and (2) the composition outside the EF becomes increasingly icier locally and globally out to & 100 AU. We expect that in a full disk simulation in which there are multiple EFs, the radial transport of all constituents over large radial distances will occur. Our results may have implications for a number of important problems such as disk mass inferences from mm-cm wavelength observations, primary accretion of asteroids and TNOs, and a number of puzzles from the meteorite record. Enrichment of the outer nebula in water may raise the possibility that some outer solar system objects are icier than "cosmic". This work is supported by a grant from the Origins of Solar Systems (OSS) program. References [1] Wadhwa and Russell, 2000. In Protostars and Planets IV, (eds. Mannings, Boss, Russell), Tucson, 995. [2] Kita et al., 2005. ASP conference series, 341, 558. [3] Williams, 2012. Meteor. Plan. Sci. 34, 1915. [4] Brauer et al., 2008. A&A 480, 859. [5] Birnsteil et al., 2010. A&A 513, A79. [6] Ciesla and Cuzzi, 2006. Icarus 181, 178. [7] Garaud, 2007. ApJ 671, 2091. [8] Windmark et al., 2012. A&A 544 (548), L16. [9] Garaud et al., 2013. ApJ 764, 146. [10] Hartmann et al., 1998. ApJ 495, 385. [11] Takeuchi and Lin, 2002. ApJ 581, 1344. [12] Cuzzi et al., 2014. ApJ supp., in press. [13] Estrada and Cuzzi, 2008. ApJ 682, 515. 