2659.PDF
BREAKING THE ICE: ON THE APPLICATION OF FRACTURE SYSTEM MECHANICS AND  FRAGMENTATION THEORY TO THE CHAOS REGIONS OF EUROPA.  C. C. Walker1, B. E. Schmidt1, and J. N. Bassis2, 1Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, 311 Ferst Drive, Atlanta, GA 30312 (cat.walker@eas.gatech.edu; britneys@eas.gatech.edu), 2University of Michigan, Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences, 2455 Hayward Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 (jbassis@umich.edu).   Introduction: The observation of water plumes from the south pole of Enceladus [1] and the recent discovery of similar features on Europa [2] hint at icepenetrating fractures in the ice shells.  The eruptions have been linked to tensile forces stemming from tidal effects that control the opening of the rifts [3, 4, 5].  The study of crack penetration is highly dependent on assumptions of ice shell thickness (and subsurface liquid water ocean), surface and interior stresses, and ice properties.  The tidally-induced stress fields for Europa and Enceladus, specifically, have been studied in terms of their ability to adequately open rifts in order to allow for escape of subsurface material. Both Enceladus' and Europa's surfaces are riddled with fractures, which betray a long history of geophysical activity.  With an ~100 km deep ocean lying atop a silicate interior (e.g. [6], [7], [8]), Europa is an intriguing target for astrobiological study. Ice cycling may provide nutrients to the Europan ocean, and pores, basal cracks, and grain boundaries in its ice may serve as harbors for life.  Such ice shell-ocean communication must occur over geologically short timescales in order for Europa to be habitable.  One way in which this can occur is through disruption of the ice shell. Thus active geological areas have strong implications for the recycling of the ice shell, and the habitability of the ice shell itself. Background: In order for subsurface water to erupt, a surface- or bottom-initiated crevasse (crevasse is defined here as a crack in the ice that does not extend the full thickness of the ice) must vertically propagate and penetrate the shell to reach a liquid reservoir. We consider two processes in the formation of terrains observed on Europa: the propagation of fracture systems and collapse/fragmentation. Propagation of a multiple-fracture system: Initiation and penetration of a surface crevasse is driven by tensile forces at and near the surface. At depth these forces are opposed by the overburden pressure from the weight of the ice (glaciostatic pressure).  Tensile stresses at the surface and within the upper brittle layer must be great enough to overcome the overburden pressure at the base to allow for full penetration of the shell.  For Europa, we can consider three possibilities: thin ice shell (~5 km); thin ice lid over a local water source (~3-5 km); or much thicker ice (~20 km). Here, we investigate the role of highly-fractured materials in fracture propagation; i.e., we take into account the highly-fractured nature of the icy shells, and the likely interaction of rifts, a phenomenon observed both on Earth's ice shelves and in other media, such as wavebreaker walls, airplane propellers, Arctic permafrost, mud flats in Death Valley, and others [9]. Application of Fragmentation Theory: Recent work suggests that chaos terrain formation may include a collapse phase, and that the eventual appearance of the chaos terrain is determined in part by fracture density within the background terrain [10]. In studying the size distribution of fragments in Europa's chaos regions, it is possible to back out physical properties of the ice, such as material strength and cohesion properties and most importantly, energy necessary to create a fragmentation event using fragmentation theory. Fragmentation theory describes the breakage of a body into several pieces (e.g. [11]). Dynamic fragmentation modeling in elastic and plastic solids is primarily a statistical study of material behavior, and is categorized into three stages: (1) crack nucleation; (2) crack propagation; (3) fragment coalescence. Implications for stress and energy in the ice shell:  We use fracture spacing and fragment sizes to determine stress and energy associated with fracture array evolution and chaos terrain formation. Fracture array propagation: The conclusion from observing neighboring, interacting rifts in the Amery Ice Shelf [12], along with studies of other fractured media mentioned previously, is that the existence of nearby fractures can affect an individual rift's propagation.  This raises the question of the significance in the difference between the oft-used isolated crack model versus modeling shell-penetrating cracks as part of a system of rifts.  We follow the approach of [13], using results from [14] to model closely-spaced fractures on Enceladus and Europa.  The result of multiple fractures is to reduce the net stress intensity factor concentrated at the rift tips, an effect that increases with decreasing rift spacing.  Because of this reduction in stress concentration, a larger tensile stress is necessary to allow for propagation deeper into the ice than has been previously suggested in single-fracture models (Fig. 1). That is, closely-spaced fractures are much shallower than single fractures under the same amount of tensile stress.  For instance, under 3 MPa of deviatoric stress, a single crack can penetrate to ~5 km depth in a 20-km 2659.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Europan ice shell. Under the same stress, closelyspaced fractures only propagate to ~1.5 km depth. This shallowing of fractures suggests that it is improbable that fractures fully rupture the ice shell, and may suggest an alternate non-ocean source for the plumes on Europa.  Additionally, the fact that higher stresses would be required to open the closely-spaced rifts points to the possibility that simple tidal models and estimates of tidal stress are not enough to predict the behavior of fracture system.  Figure 1. The effect of multiple fractures in a region of ice under tension or compression: the bottom 1 km (left) and top 1 km (right) of a 5-km thick Europan ice lid (presumed above a subsurface reservoir). Propagation depth (or height) in terms of fraction of the shell penetrated for basal fractures (left) and surface fractures (right), for both single and multiple crack cases over a range of stress values.  Fragmentation events: Different patterns of fragmentation can produce different estimates of material properties and the energy required to produce the fragmentation event, examples of which are shown in Fig. 2 and defined in [11].  A characteristic length scale is based on the local balance of kinetic and fracture energy and layout of fragments. In this theory, we consider a body to break apart into a certain collection of fragments.  Each fragment takes kinetic energy as the object breaks up, and this energy goes into local expansion and rigid-body motion.  Local kinetic energy then contributes to further failure. A characteristic length scale for fragmentation is based on the energy balance of potential, kinetic, and fracture energies in a given material [11]. Thus, [11] determined the energy driving fragmentation in two dimensions based on material density, strain rate, surface energy, propagation speed, and fracture toughness.   We used simple statistical model [11] to test the use of fragmentation theory on collapse features.  Using published fragment size data from the Val Pola rock avalanche [15], we determined the energy driving the event to be approximately 1.5 kJ/kg, in agreement with previous estimates and measurements. Hence, we will present our estimate of the energy released in chaos terrain collapse through application of fragmentation theory and iceberg capsize analysis.  This approach allows us to understand the mechanism behind dynamic collapse of the ice shell as well as its potential for mixing material in the upper ~5km of the ice shell downward, providing input to a recycling ice shell.  Thus, in determining the fragment size distribution, and the dynamic history of that ice, we will constrain physical properties of the ice shell, stress necessary for fracture feature formation, energy released in a collapse event associated with chaos formation, and their respective implications for Europa's habitability.  Figure 2. Right: Common geometric fragmentation patterns, picture from [9]; Left: PIA01403 - chaos region on Europa taken by Galileo in 1998; (a) Random lines of equal length; (b) Pickup Sticks/Mott fragmentation; (c) Sequential Segmentation; (d) Same as (c) with conditions on shortest dimension; (e) Randomly distributed/oriented segments; (f) VoronoiDirichlet fragmentation. Each type is associated with specific length scales and fragmentation types.  References: [1] Porco, C. C. et al. (2006) Science, 311, 1393-1401. [2] Roth, L. et al. (2013) Science, Online 12 Dec. 2013. [3] Hurford, T.A. et al. (2007) Nature, 447, 292-294. [4] Smith-Konter, B. and Pappalardo, R.T. (2008) Icarus, 198, 435-451. [5] Olgin, J.G., et al. (2011) GRL, 380, L02201.    [6] Khurana, K. K., et al. (1999) Nature, 395, 777-780.  [7] Kivelson, M. G., et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 4609-4625. [8] Zimmer, C., Khurana, K. K. and Kivelson, M. G. (2000) Icarus, 147, 329-347. [9] Parker, A.P. (1998) Army Armament Research Con-tractor Report, ARCCB-CR-98009. [10] Schmidt, B. E. et al. (2011), Nature, 479, 502-505. [11] Grady, D. E. and Kipp, M. E. (1995) Int. J. Sol. and Struct., 32, 2779-2791. [12] Walker, C. C., Bassis, J. N., Fricker, H. A., and Czerwinski, R. J. (2013) JGR, 118, in press. [13] van der Veen, C.J. (1998) Cold Regions Science and Technology, 27, 31-47. [14] Patterson, W.S.B. (1994) Pergammon/ Elsevier. [15] Crosta, G. B., Chen, H., and Lee, C. F. (2004) Geomorphology, 60, 127-146. 2659.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
