2691.PDF
INVISIBLE MARS: THE MAVEN EDUCATION AND PUBLIC OUTREACH SCIENCE ON A SPHERE PROGRAM.  A. J. P. Jones1,2, B. C. Hsu1,2, L. V. Bleacher1, N. Alima Ali3, K. Hauck3, L. Peticolas3, 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (8800 Greenbelt Road, Greenbelt MD 20771; andrea.j.jones@nasa.gov), 2Lunar and Planetary Institute (3600 Bay Area Blvd., Houston TX 77058), 3Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley (7 Gauss Way, Berkeley CA 94720).   Introduction:  The Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) mission launched in November 2013. It will explore Mars’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere and its interactions with the solar wind, solar storms, and solar-EUV energy drivers. MAVEN will help scientists better understand the current structure of the upper atmosphere and ionosphere, the current rates of atmospheric loss and the processes that control this loss, and the integrated loss to space through time [e.g. 1, 2]. Scientists will use MAVEN data to determine the role that the loss of volatile compounds, such as CO2, N2, and H2O from the Mars atmosphere to space has played through time, providing insight into the history of Mars’s atmosphere and climate, liquid water, and planetary habitability [3]. The MAVEN Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) program is designed to share information about the MAVEN mission and MAVEN science results with educators and the public nationwide [3]. The MAVEN E/PO Science On a Sphere (SOS) team shares this information through a SOS module, Invisible Mars, and trainings for SOS network members, who facilitate SOS programs across the country. Science On a Sphere:  Science On a Sphere (SOS) is a large visualization system developed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). It uses computers and video projectors to display animated data onto the outside of a suspended 6-foot-diameter sphere [4].   Mars data displayed on the SOS installation in the Lawrence Hall of Science at the University of California, Berkeley. Invisible Mars SOS Module:  The MAVEN Invisible Mars SOS program is designed to help the public better understand the story of water on Mars, and how we are learning more about it. The SOS module portrays the mystery of what happened to the water on Mars in the context of a detective story. It covers how MAVEN will help solve this mystery by studying the martian atmosphere, how it has changed over time, and how it interacts with the Sun and the solar wind. The module also delves into Mars exploration, featuring past, present, and future Mars missions, and includes an activity comparing images of water-related features on Earth and Mars. The module will help people understand that a planet's climate can change over time and also how learning more about Mars helps us learn more about Earth and other planets. The MAVEN Invisible Mars SOS module includes the Invisible Mars script, playlist, datasets, background for the facilitator about MAVEN and water on Mars, an activity comparing images of water-related features on Earth and Mars, and an optional solar wind activity. The script builds on a previous NASA-funded Mars Space Weather E/PO program for SOS, Seeing the Invisible.  Invisible Mars SOS Module Development:  The MAVEN Invisible Mars SOS module was developed through a collaboration of MAVEN E/PO Team members at the University of California, Berkeley and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center/Lunar and Planetary Institute, in consultation with MAVEN Science Team members (including MAVEN’s Principal Investigator, Bruce Jakosky, at the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado, Boulder) and support from SOS professionals at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and the University of California, Berkeley. The initial script was completed in 2011, and pilot tested in 2012. The MAVEN SOS E/PO Team offered a webinar to SOS network members featuring Invisible Mars as well as an overview of the MAVEN mission and its science investigations. Participants were asked to share the Invisible Mars program with audiences at their institutions and then provide feedback to the MAVEN SOS E/PO Team. The Team modified the Invisible Mars module based on feedback from pilot testers as well as recommendations from the NASA Earth & Space Science Education Product Review [5]. 2691.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Additional revisions were made based on feedback from participants at an in-person workshop held at Cape Canaveral, Florida in November 2013. The Invisible Mars script and datasets will be updated as MAVEN returns data and new scientific discoveries are made. The Invisible Mars SOS module will be freely available on the MAVEN SOS website (http://lasp.colorado.edu/home/maven/educationoutreach/afterschoolsummer-programs/invisible-mars/) and NASA Wavelength (http://nasawavelength.org), a searchable database of all NASA Earth & Space Science Education Product Review-approved activities and resources [6]. Invisible Mars Professional Development:  The MAVEN SOS E/PO Team offers professional development to SOS facilitators nationwide through inperson and virtual trainings. The first in-person training was held in Cape Canaveral, Florida in association with MAVEN’s launch. The training featured the Invisible Mars module and relevant information about the MAVEN mission and Mars science. Training participants learned this information through hands-on and computer-based activities that they can share with audiences at their home institutions, presentations, and discussions. A MAVEN Science Team member and the MAVEN Program Executive spoke to the participants about their involvement in the mission. Fifteen SOS professionals from ten institutions around the country, including museums, science centers, and planetariums, participated in the training. The MAVEN SOS E/PO Team will keep in touch with the participants to answer questions, provide them with mission updates, and to monitor progress sharing Invisible Mars with their audiences. Planning is underway for a second in-person workshop to be held in spring 2014 in conjunction with the SOS Network Meeting. The MAVEN SOS E/PO Team will also offer quarterly virtual professional development sessions to SOS network members. These sessions will update SOS network members about MAVEN mission milestones and science results that they can share with their audiences. The sessions will also help bring the Invisible Mars module to new network members. The MAVEN E/PO Team anticipates that over the course of the MAVEN mission, SOS network members will share Invisible Mars with thousands of members of the public. The MAVEN SOS trainings are evaluated by Allyson Walker of  Cornerstone Evaluation Associates LLC. Evaluation data is used to improve the MAVEN SOS module and future trainings.  Participants learn about the composition of the Mars atmosphere by building models using dried beans and plastic bags in the MAVEN SOS workshop held in Cape Canaveral, Florida; November 2013.  References: [1] Jakosky B. M. and the MAVEN Science Team (2011) EPSC Abstracts, Vol. 6, EPSCDPS2011-58. [2] Jakosky B. M. (2011) The Fourth International Workshop on the Mars Atmosphere: Modelling and Observation, pp. 477. [3] Peticolas L. (2011) MAVEN Education and Public Outreach Implementation Plan, approved by NASA Headquarters. [4] Science On a Sphere website: http://sos.noaa.gov. [5] NASA Earth & Space Science Education Product Review website: http://nasareviews.strategies.org. [6] Schwerin T. et al. (2012) AGU Fall Meeting. Abstract ED21A-0712.  Thanks to the MAVEN mission for support of this program. 2691.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
