 Initial Results From the Comet ISON Observing Campaign (CIOC). C.M. Lisse1 and the CIOC Team, 1Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 11100 Johns Hopkins Road, Laurel, MD 20723 carey.lisse@jhuapl.edu   Abstract: In this paper we present an overview of the observing results and cometary behavior found for C/2012 S1 (ISON) during its 2012 - 2013 apparition. We also present a list of initiatives tried and lessons learned from the coordinated Comet ISON Observing Campaign (CIOC), including the use of modern digital era resources, that could be applied to future comet observing campaigns, e.g. the upcoming Comet Siding Spring and ROSETTA campaigns of 2014.  Introduction:  In January 2013, NASA requested a volunteer through the SBAG process to aid in coordinating observations of comet C/2012 S1 (ISON), colloquially known as Comet ISON. The comet was predicted to have a number of unusually close and bright encounters with the inner planets, and it was important to have an expert in place to help marshal all available resources. What were not predicted well were the comet's unusual activity pattern and the method of its demise, nor the public's immense interest. Given over 25 years of comet observing expertise, including the Comet Halley, Hyakutake, Hale-Bopp, Tempel 1, and Hartley 2 coordinated observing campaigns, my location at APL next to members of the MRO, MSL, and MESSENGER teams and long-term HST, Keck, and IRTF comet observers, and my long tenure on the Keck/IRTF MOWG, I estimated I was in a position to provide some of the requested support, and so responded to the call for a volunteer, which was accepted immediately. Estimating that the task would likely need much more expertise, I turned to a number of capable young and mid-level comet scientists at the SBAG meeting, and asked them to help, and the CIOC was created.  Building on the successes and learning from the problems of campaigns in the past, the CIOC built an effort to maximize the observations made and science returned from Comet ISON utilizing the free market, i.e. by providing as much information to observers and assets in the professional, amateur, solar, planetary, and astrophysical domains. We utilized the PEN and DPS newsletters, as well as a direct email exploder available to all interested registrants. Letters describing the opportunity were sent to the NSF and NSO offices in anticipation of comet observing requests. Well subscribed public observing campaigns at the IRTF and Keck were created. We established a website to provide quick access to the latest facts and observing results for the comet, and ran two webstreamed observer's workshops to help coordinate and stimulate measurements while identifying any gaps in observer coverage, but did not attempt to archive any data.  Comet ISON came fresh from the Oort Cloud as predicted, coming within 0.07 AU of Mars, 0.24 AU of Mercury, and 106 km of the solar photospheric surface. It did not become the "Comet of the Century" in terms of its brightness in the Earth's nighttime sky as predicted, but instead became one of the rare dynamically new Oort Cloud comets to graze the Sun's corona (these occur every few decades; the last one observed was  C/Ikeya-Seki 1965). For an initially bright comet detected as far out as the orbit of Saturn in Sept 2011 (Fig. 1), the comet worried us all quite a bit with its flatlining activity from 4 to 0.8 AU (March to Oct 2013). It thus put on a somewhat disappointing show-   ing at Mars in early October, but then defied predictions of its demise and a government shutdown, ramping up instead to become a beautiful early morning green "lollipop" as it passed Mercury in midNovember (Fig. 2). ISON ultimately peaked at a gas production rate maximum of ~ 2 x 1030 mol/sec of water [1] within the last few days before perihelion, then seemed to have almost no gas output the day of perihelion [2] before spectacularly disrupting under the watchful eyes of the SOHO and STEREO spacecraft on Thanksgiving Day, 28 Nov 2013 (Fig. 2), after which its debris fan was tracked for days until it finally disappeared [3,4]. Throughout this time, parallels to the behavior of other dynamically new comets, like C/1973 E (Kohoutek), were readily apparent.   Over 19 spacecraft ultimately pointed at the comet, including assets from NASA's astrophysics, heliophysics, and planetary divisions, with at least 12 reporting detections of it ranging from the x-ray through the infrared. This was partly due to the fact that ISON was fortuitously coming close to all the inner planets; no one location in the solar system had the best seat for viewing the comet for very long. More than 30 observatories observed ISON from the ground at UV to radio wavelengths. Important findings concerning the comet's size, rotation state, dust to gas ratio, composition, and coma and tail structure were made during ISON'S  apparition. Given the incredible diversity of professional interest in the comet, having a neutral, responsible, and knowledgeable centralized team of experts was highly useful for maximizing the scientific return from the comet.  The CIOC was also highly useful for the public and press to refer to in promoting NASA's business and for disseminating astronomical learning while diffusing some of the more unusual cometary theories that were promulgated. (From April - December 2013, we were fielding between 5 and 50 calls + emails per week concerning the comet. By December 2013 the CIOC webpage had received > 1.5 million individual hits.)  Resources ultimately created by the CIOC include: weekly cometary lightcurves derived from MPC data, an ISON FAQS page, an on-line observer's schedule, posted observer's logs, an ISON news email exploder, a list of current ISON publications, and a daily to weekly expert blog. Using website statistics, we can gauge how much each one of these was used.  References. [1] Bertaux, J.-L. et al. (2013) Fall AGU Abstract ; Combi, M. (2013) private commun. re: SOHO/SWAN Lyman alpha ISON measurements [2] Biver, N. (2013) private commun. re: IRAM radio coma gas ISON measurements [3] Battams, K. (2013) private commun. re: SOHO, STEREO optical clear filter movies of ISON's perihelion passage [4] Sekanina, Z.; Boehnhardt, H. et al., (2013) CBET 3731;  and Jones, G. (2013) private commun. re: Finson-Probstein dynamical models of ISON dust trajectories  Acknowledgements. The CIOC would like to gratefully acknowledge the guidance and support provided by the NASA Planetary Science Division staff, especially K. Ericksen, K. Fast, J. Green, and L. Johnson.    