 THE PRE-, SYN- AND POST-IMPACT ORIGIN OF HYDRATED PHASES: A CASE STUDY BASED ON THE REMOTE SENSING AND GROUND-TRUTH AT THE HAUGHTON IMPACT STRUCTURE, NUNAVUT, CANADA.  L. L. Tornabene1,2, G. R. Osinski1,3, R. N. Greenberger4, J. L. Bishop2, E. A. Cloutis5 , C. L. Marion1, J. F. Mustard4, A. Pontefract1 and M. S. Ramsey6, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration/Dept. of Earth Sciences, Univ. of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B7 (livio@cpsx.uwo.ca), 2SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA 94043, 3Dept. Physics & Astronomy, Univ. of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B7, 4Dept. of Geological Sciences, Brown Univ., Providence, RI 02912, 5Dept. of Geography, Univ. of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, MB R3B 2E9, 6Dept. Geology & Planetary Science, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260.  Introduction: Results from Observatoire pour la Mineralogie, l'Eau, les Glaces et l'Activitié (OMEGA) and Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) have now established that hydrated phases, particularly silicates, are abundant within the heavily-cratered southern highlands of Mars and are commonly associated with impact craters (~70% of all documented occurrences) [e.g., 1-3]. Determining whether impacts played a major role in the origin of these phases is key towards for deciphering the early climate and aqueous history of Mars [3-6]. Hydrated phases associated with impact craters may originate as pre-, syn- or post-impact materials or any combination of the three, even within single impact craters [3-4]. Determining which of the three origins are plausible for crater-related spectral signatures, or delineating between them, is not trivial, and may require detailed synthesis of multiple data sets as well as local and regional geologic context.  Here we use both remote sensing and ground-truth data from field studies (conducted in July 2013) of the ~23 Mya Haughton impact structure (HIS) (Da = 23 km; 75 ° 22′ N, 89 ° 41′ W), Devon Island, Nunavut, Canada, utilized as a Mars analogue, to assess the origin of hydrated phases associated with the structure. The hope is to place further constraints on the uses and limitations of applying remote sensing data exclusively to determine the pre-, syn- and post-impact origin of hydrated phases.  Background and Methods: Previous work on mineral and lithologic mapping of the HIS using Thermal Infrared (TIR) emissivity data and Visible Near-Infrared (VNIR) reflectance data from the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission Radiometer (ASTER) indicates that there are high concentrations of gypsum associated with the structure [7-8]. Indeed, both gypsum and anhydrite occur within the regional stratigraphic section in the Bay Fiord Formation (Fm.) originating from ~ 1 km depth in the pre-impact target and as hydrothermal deposits (var. selenite) [e.g., 710]. Previous spectral mapping results are highly consistent with detailed geologic mapping based on multiple field seasons [7-9]. Based on previous results, we constructed a gypsum spectral parameter exploiting the strong TIR absorption in ASTER band 11 (8.63 µm) that produces a absorption strength map that approximates abundance (Fig. 1). Our new "Gypsum" Unit map is consistent with previous linear deconvolution mapping results and is favoured in this study due to less noise when compared to the previous product [7]. Figure 1. A 90-meter ASTER TIR Gypsum band ratio image with colorized absorption strength (approximating "gypsum" abundance) superimposed on the 15-meter ASTER IR band image of the Haughton impact structure. Analysis and synthesis of this map with other remote sensing data sets (particularly visible images and Digital Terrain Models) were used to formulate pre-, syn- and post-impact interpretations of the data prior to ground-truthing them in the field [7-8]. These include: 1) uplifted and exposed bedrock from the target, ranging from megablocks in the crater-fill impact melt rocks to larger-scale parautochthonous bedrock uplifted and exposed during crater modification  (pre-), and 2) hydrothermally emplaced and/or re-mobilized gypsum (syn- and post-).  A portable ASD VNIR field spectrometer was used to spectrally identify gypsum associated with rocks and  soils in the field [see 11]. Samples of rocks and soils were also collected for verification of mineral composition in the lab. Results & Observations: Field observations of all the major concentrations of the "Gypsum" Unit during the July 2013 HIS field season indicate that spectral "Gypsum" signature correlates with: 1) bedrock outcrops and megablocks, 2) gullies and valleys, 3) masswasting and depositional fans, 4) veneers/coatings and encrusted soils, and 5) hydrothermal veins and vugs of gypsum (var. selenite). Outcrops of massive, fractured, layered and intercalated gypsum/anhydrite and carbonate bedrock of the Bay Fiord Fm. provides the strongest spectral signature detected by ASTER. However, all ouctrops visited in the field were noted to be pervasively cross-cut by abundant gypsum (selenite) veins and vugs consistent with remobilization and overprinting of these rocks by the HIS hydrothermal system (Fig. 2) [10, 12]. Megablocks of gypsum and anhydrite in the Rhinocerous Creek river valley outcrop were noted in the field, but cannot be distinguished from outcrops of parautochthonous Bay Fiord Fm. in the remote sensing data.   Figure 2. HIS gypsum (variety selenite) vein.  Extensive and active gullies along the Bruno Escarpment (N-S trending scarp in eastern HIS; Fig. 1) provide the most extensive and second strongest spectral signature detected by ASTER. Field observations show that the gullies are eroding out fresh clasts of gypsum and anhydrite in various states of shock from the impact melt breccia unit that lines the HIS, but are also responsible for depositing clast-rich fans, rock veneers/coatings and encrusted soils. Gypsum encrusted soils are observed several cm below the surface, and in some cases produce cavernous deposits 10s of cms thick (Fig. 3). These soils were also observed atop outcrops of Bay Fiord Fm.   Mass wasting fans rich in gypsum and anhydrite are also present when Bay Fiord Fm. bedrock is exposed and provides steep slopes.  Conclusions: The HIS is a Mars analogue site that helps us to determine the origin and emplacement mechanisms of hydrated phases. The HIS exhibits a complex history with all three scenarios co-existing at the site (pre-, syn- and post-). The "Gypsum" Unit spectral signature is dominated by pre- and post-impact occurrences of gypsum. Unfortunately, hydrothermal veins and vugs are too small to resolve at ASTER spatial scales, but an important result of this study is the pervasive hydrothermal overprinting of the pre-impact parautochthonous bedrock observed in the field.  Moreover, geologic and morphologic context are essential as the active gullies of the Bruno Escarpment are not only exposing higher concentrations of Bay Fiord Fm. clasts, but also extensive hydrothermal veins and vugs in the impact melt breccia unit. Figure 3. HIS gypsum encrusted soil.  Post-impact mechanical and aqueous weathering processes associated with active gullies and fluvial drainage channels appear to be responsible for some of the major spectral contributions of the "Gypsum" Unit in the ASTER TIR data. This includes the physical breakdown and dissolution, respectively, transport and deposition of the gypsum component. Our results indicate that one mode of origin for hydrated phases associated with impact craters should not be too readily dismissed in favour of other modes of origin, especially in the absence of strong supporting contextual evidence. High-resolution data both from orbit [3-4] and in situ [see 11] are necessary to resolve hydrothermal occurrences and place further constraints on the origin of these phases and the aqueous history of Mars. References: [1] Carter et al. (2011) LPSC, Abstract #2593. [2] Ehlmann et al. (2011) Nature, 479, 53-60.  [3] Osinski et al. (2013) Icarus, 224, 347-363. [4] Tornabene et al. (2013), Icarus, 118, 994-1012. [5] Schwenzer and Kring (2010) Geology, 37, 1091-1094. [6] Schwenzer et al. (2012) EPSL, 335-336, 9-17. [7] Tornabene et al. (2005) MAPS, 12, 1835-1858. [8] Wright et al. (2013) in Impact Cratering: Processes and Products. [9] Osinski et al. (2005) MAPS, 40. [10] Osinski et al. (2001) MAPS, 36, 731-745. [11] Greenberger et al. (2014), LPSC, this conference. [12] Osinski (2005), Geofluids, 5, 202-220. Acknowledgements: LLT is grateful for support from NSERC, Polar Continental Shelf Program, CSA, MDA through the Industrial Research Chair in Planetary Geology, Gordon Osinski, and the MRO and ASTER science teams. 