2713.PDF
Subduction of a Sluggish Lid: Examples from Laboratory Experiments and Venus. S. E. Smrekar1 and A. Davaille, 1NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory Pasadena, CA, 91109, ssmrekar@jpl.nasa.gov, 2Laboratoire FAST, CNRS/U-PSud, Orsay, France, davaille@fast.u-psud.fr.   Introduction:  The possible role of plate tectonics in creating habitable zones and the conditions required to start plate tectonics are currently hotly debated due to the discovery of many Earth-sized exoplanets.  The initiation of subduction is both the gateway to plate tectonics and a key link between interior convection and lithospheric rheology. Modeling the details of plate failure and the initiation of subduction is very challenging due to the complexity of plate rheology and differences in viscosity between the lithosphere and mantle.  For this reason, laboratory fluid dynamic experiments play an essential role in illuminating plate deformation and the relationship with convection.  On Earth, subduction zones are typically old and covered with sediments. On Venus, numerous potential subduction sites have been identified. The interpretation of high emissivity as relatively recent, unweathered flows suggests that one such location -Lada Terra - may be geologically active. Background: Subduction on Venus?  There are 10s of thousands of km of arcuate troughs with outer flexural rises on Venus.  A number of authors interpreted these regions as back-arc subduction with limited convergence based on the topographic evidence for a trough and an exterior flexural bulge, the intense fracture pattern interpreted as thrusting, and gravity data that is consistent with subducted lithosphere [e.g. 1-3].  Others have argued again subduction on Venus due to a lack of corresponding extensional zones and the presence of features that cross the two sides of the subduction zones in some areas [4]. Subduction and Mantle Plumes. Several studies have proposed a link between subduction and mantle plumes. On Venus, the vast majority of proposed subduction trenches are found at coronae. Coronae are approximately circular features defined by a fracture annulus along with a wide range of topographic expressions.  A variety of formation models have been proposed for coronae, including upwelling, delamination, and coupled upwelling and delamination.  [2] suggested that a plume at Artemis Corona might have produced crustal thickening that could localize subduction. [1] hypothesized that thinning of the lithosphere above a plume could have break the plate sufficiently to allow the lithosphere to sink under its own weight.  [3] proposed that extensional zones created by uplift above a plume might create weak zones that could permit foundering.  [5] modeled the formation of small coronae, showing that flow in a plume head could initiate delamination that accounts for many of the observed topographic forms.  The possible link between plumes and the initiation of subduction has also been proposed for Earth.  Heat flow from plumes has been proposed to weaken the lithosphere, making it easier to break the lithosphere.  [6] modeled the deformation of the lithosphere above a plume head, and concluded that under certain conditions the strain imparted by the upwelling can cause failure throughout the lithosphere, including the continental lithosphere.  Methods and Results: Laboratory Experiments. We carried out experiments on convection in aqueous colloidal dispersions heated from below, and dried and cooled from above. The rheology of these fluids depends strongly on solid particle fraction φp, being Newtonian at low φp, and presenting yield stress, elasticity, and brittle properties as φp increases [7]. So if drying is sufficiently rapid, a skin forms on the surface and may participate (or not) to the convective motions, depending on the experimental parameters [8]. Moreover, we recently observed that (1) the existence of   upwelling plumes help trigger subduction, the asymmetric subduction zone being localized on the rim of 2713.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
the plume impingement zone under the lithosphere (Fig.1); (2) depending on the lithospheric rheology, the nascent subduction can then either stop as the result of subducted plate necking, or continue to sink smoothly.  Data Analysis for Lada Terra/Quetzelpetlatl Corona: [3] included the trench at Quetzelpetlatl Corona (QC) in their survey of potential subduction zones. Lada Terra is ~1000 km diameter topographic rise centered near 65°S, 10°E, of which the 200° arc of the trench and outer rise of QC (~800 km diameter) defines the western margin (Figure 2). We examine Lada Terra and QC (LT/QC) for two reasons.  First, despite the large positive gravity anomaly, no analysis of the gravity signature has been conducted, likely due to the relatively low resolution (spherical harmonic degree and order 70).  The gravity data is examined below. Second, there are several areas of high emissivity relative to the average values for Venus in this area [9]. [10] interpreted these anomalies as indicative of variations in flow composition. [9] indicated two possible interpretations: compositional variations or unweathered basalt.  [11] interpreted the high emissivity flows at other 3 large volcanic rises as indicative of recent, unweathered flow based on the prior interpretation of these regions as overlying active plumes, the position of the flows at the top of the stratigraphic column, and the fact that basaltic flows with compositions consistent with high emissivity anomalies are expected to rapidly weather to minerals with lower emissivity.  Gravity and Topography Data Analysis:  The resolution of the Magellan gravity field at LT/QC is only about degree and order 70, corresponding to a spatial scale of ~500 km.  The low resolution of the data makes examining the admittance signature of little value. However, the long wavelength data do provide insight into the apparent depth of compensation for the topographic rise. At over 45 m, the geoid high at LT/QC is one of the largest geoid anomalies on Venus.  The long wavelength topography peaks at just over 2 km.  The geoid-to-topography ratio for LT/QC is ~25 m.  This value is comparable to those of other large volcanic rises, such as Beta, Atla, and Imdr Regiones. Assuming a model of thermal (Pratt) isostatic compensation, a typical value mantle density and a thermal anomaly corresponding to a 100°C temperature difference in the plume head yields compensation depths of approximately 200 km.  An Airy model of compensation yields a compensation depth of ~150 km.  In either case, the depths are much larger than the thickness of the crust. As at other large volcanic rises, the broad topographic rises, the abundant volcanism, and the large GTR and apparent depth of compensation make the presence of a mantle plume at depth a reasonable interpretation of the large compensation depth.  Although the gravity data are rather low in resolution, some variations across LT/QC are observed (FIgure 2).  The gravity peaks are above the interior of the topographic rise, and over the rift zone that extends to the northeast, ending at Ethinoa Corona.  As at other large coronae proposed to be subduction zones, the gravity has a high just inboard of the trench consistent with the presence of dense lithosphere at depth [4].  Figure 2. Gravity (deg. & order 70) over topography (deg. & order 300).  White indicates the trough at QC. Discussion and Conclusions.  Laboratory experiments offer a means of linking convection and lithospheric deformation for realistic rheologies.  Experiments with weaker lithosphere produce features with many similarities to Venus.  One phenomenon observed in the lab is initiation of subduction on the rim of a plume head.  Interpretation of geophysical data sets suggests that the trough at Quetzelpetlatl is likely an example of such limited subduction.  If this is correct, Venus is an example of a sluggish rather than stagnant lid planet in that convection can produce failure and subduction of the lithosphere.  Since subduction appears to be only limited, this process is distinct from terrestrial style plate tectonics. References: [1] Sandwell D.T. and G. Schubert (1992) Science, 257, 766-770. [2] Brown C.D. and R.E. Grimm (1995) Icarus 117, 219-249. [3] Schubert G and D. T. Sandwell, (1995) Icarus 117, 173-196. [4] Hansen V.L. and R.J.  Phillips (1993) Science 260, 526-530. [5] Smrekar S.E., and E.R. Stofan (1997) Science 277, 1289-1294 [6] Burov E. and S. Cloetingh (2010) GRL 37, doi:10.1029/2009GL041535. [7] Di Giuseppe E. et al. (2012) Rheol. Acta 51(5), 451-465. [8] Davaille A., et al. (2011) EPSC-DPS abst, p.694. [9] Helbert J. et al. (2008) GRL 35, doi:10.1029/ 2008GL033609. [10] Ivanov M. and J.W. Head (2010) PSS 58, 1880-1894. [11] Smrekar S. et al. (2010) Science 328, 605-608.  Acknowledgements: Part of this research was done at Jet Propulsiown Laboratory/Caltech. 2713.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
