2718.PDF
MESOSCALE NUMERICAL MODELING OF COMPACTION OF PRIMITIVE SOLAR SYSTEM SOLIDS IN LOWVELOCITY COLLISIONS T. M. Davison1, G. S. Collins1 and P. A. Bland2. 1Impacts and Astromaterials ResearchCentre, Department of Earth Science and Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom(E-mail: thomas.davison@imperial.ac.uk). 2Department of Applied Geology, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987,Perth, WA 6845, Australia.Introduction: Previous numerical studies of impact processing (e.g., compaction, heating) of primordial solids [e.g. 1,2] have estimated 'bulk' pressuretemperature conditions over large (planetesimal) scales.However, primordial solar system solids accumulated asbimodal mixtures of mm-scale zero-porosity inclusions(chondrules) surrounded by highly porous, sub-µm dustparticles (matrix). The fine-scale response of such mixtures to shock has not previously been modeled, despitethe fact that these mixtures were the precursors to all solar system materials. Here we describe a novel method ofquantifying the meteorite-scale response of primordial solar system mixtures to shock compaction in low-velocityimpacts. Our results provide an important link betweenmeteoritic evidence and the bulk thermal and compactionhistories of meteorite parent bodies.Modeling: A suite of "mesoscale" numerical planar impact simulations were performed using the iSALEshock physics code [3-5], in which shock waves werepropagated through a bimodal mixture of explicitly resolved non-porous disks (the chondrules) surrounded bya highly porous matrix. Chondrules were placed with random sizes (in the range 0.3-1 mm) and spacing within thecomputational mesh until the desired matrix-to-chondrulevolume ratio was reached. An ANEOS-derived equation of state table for forsterite [6] was used to describethe thermodynamic response of both the non-porous disksand the solid component of the matrix. Compaction ofporosity and material strength were modeled using themethods described in [4,5]. The chondrules were given ahigh cohesive strength (1 GPa), whereas the porous matrixwas assumed to be very weak, with a cohesive strength ofa few kPa. Simulations spanned a range in impact velocity (vi = 0.75-3 km/s), initial matrix volume fraction(30-70%) and initial matrix porosity (60-80%), with aninitial temperature of 300 K. Lagrangian tracer particlesrecorded the peak- and post-shock state of the matrix andchondrule material, from which the bulk state was determined.Results: A typical simulation is shown in Figure 1.The first panel on the left shows the initial conditions ofthe model, in which a flyer plate impacts a cover plateat the prescribed velocity (in this case, 1 km/s). Chondrules and matrix are coloured grey and brown in thispanel, respectively. The cover plate is used to allow theshock wave to reach a steady state before entering thesample plate. To prevent a release wave being generatedat the rear edge of the sample, a buffer plate was placedbehind the sample plate. All plates (flyer, cover, sample and buffer) were assigned the same material compositions (matrix fraction and porosity), to prevent any shockimpedance mismatches. In the second panel, the shockwave is seen propagating into both the cover and flyerplates. By 12 µs, the shock wave has reached the samFigure 1: Time sequence (from left to right) of a typical mesoscale simulation of a nominally planar shockwavepropagating through a bimodal mixture of explicitly resolved non-porous chondrules surrounded by a high-porositymatrix. The colour-scale for the right panel denotes the instantaneous longitudinal stress; the colour-scale for the leftpanel denotes temperature. The impact velocity was 1 km/s, and the initial matrix fraction was 0.7.12718.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
a) b) c)Figure 2: Shock pressure (left), peak-shock temperature (middle) and post-shock porosity (right) as a function of impact velocity for a matrix volume fraction of 70%. Black symbols show bulk values of the state quantity, averagedover the entire sample region; red and blue symbols (and error bars) show mean (and standard deviation) of the statevariable in the matrix and chondrule fraction, respectively.ple. By 24 µs, the shock wave has propagated through thesample plate, and a release (rarefaction) wave has beengenerated at the free-surface at the rear edge of the flyerplate, and is travelling through the flyer plate towards thecover and sample plates. Values of post-shock temperature and porosity were recorded just after the release wavehad passed through the sample mixture (e.g. 48 µs in Figure 1).The bulk (volume averaged) shock pressure, temperature and porosity of the mixture simulated using our newmesoscale model is consistent with previous macroscalemodels (using the bulk values as the initial conditions [e.g.2]) and Hugoniot curves created with the ε − α porouscompaction model (Figure 2a-c). The post-shock state ofthe mixtures can be compared with meteoritic evidence.For the simulation shown in Fig. 1, the final bulk porosity(18%; Figure 2c) and matrix fraction (54%) are consistentwith the measured properties of carbonaceous chondrites[e.g. 7,8]. For a corresponding simulation with an initialmatrix fraction of 30%, the final bulk porosity (4%) andmatrix fraction (16%) are similar to measurements fromordinary chondrites [e.g. 7,8].Resolving at the finer mesoscale, our simulations reveal a complex, heterogeneous response to shock withinthe mixture. While peak pressures are similar in the chondrules and the matrix, for vi > 1.5 km/s they are ∼ 2times higher than the average bulk pressure recorded (Figure 2b); this is a consequence of the mesoscale structure,which creates resonant oscillations about the steady waveamplitude, the peaks of which are recorded in the chondrules and matrix. This behaviour has been observed inlaboratory experiments and numerical models of granularmaterials and porous rocks [9-11].Moreover, there is a large dichotomy between the temperatures recorded in the matrix and the chondrules: Themassive difference in compressibility between the porousmatrix and the nonporous chondrules results in muchgreater energy deposition in the matrix. Consequently,while the chondrules record only a modest temperaturechange, well below the bulk temperature increase, thepost-shock temperature increase in the matrix is muchlarger (several hundred K) than in the bulk and highlyvariable. The juxtaposition of hot matrix and cold chondrules imply that the temperature difference is short-lived:the chondrules act as a heat sink, equilibrating the mixtureto the bulk post-shock temperature in seconds.Conclusions: For a range of impact velocities andinitial matrix fractions, our mesoscale simulations canproduce final materials with meteorite-group-like properties (porosity, matrix abundance) from low-velocity impacts on primordial solid materials. Even at low velocities, transient temperature excursions in the matrix can bemuch higher than the bulk temperature. Using this methodto model specific scenarios (specific rocks, compositionsand mixtures of components), and matching them to meteorite groups allows, for the first time, a full quantitativeanalysis of the shock evolution of primitive materials, andthus enables a firm link between numerical modeling andmeasurements of meteoritic samples.Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge theiSALE developers (www.isale-code.de). TMD and GSCwere supported by STFC grant ST/J001260/1.References: [1] K. Keil et al., (1997) Meteorit.Planet. Sci., 32:349-363. [2] T. M. Davison et al., (2012)Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 95:252-269. [3] A. Amsdenet al., (1980) Los Alamos National Laboratories Report,LA-8095:101p. [4] G. S. Collins et al., (2004) Meteorit.Planet. Sci., 39(2):217-231. [5] K. Wünnemann et al.,(2006) Icarus, 180:514-527. [6] W. Benz et al., Icarus,81:113-131, 1989. [7] G. Consolmagno et al., (2008)Chem. Erde — Geochem., 68(1):1-29. [8] E. R. D. Scottet al., (1996) in Chondrules and the Protoplanetary Disk,H. Hewins, R. H. Jones and E. R. D. Scott, eds. pp. 8796. [9] S. M. Zhuang et al., (2003) J. Mech. Phys. Solids,51(2):245-265. [10] W. M. Trott et al., (2007) J. Appl.Phys., 101(2):024917-024921. [11] N. Güldemeister etal., (2013) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 48(1):115-133.22718.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
