2721.PDF
ICELANDIC LAVA FIELDS AS A TERRESTRIAL ANALOG FOR MARS: INVESTIGATION OF HABITABILITY, PRODUCTIVITY AND MICROBIAL DIVERSITY.  M. L. Cable1, E. S. Amador2, E. Schwieterman2, M. B. Jacobsen3, C. Yin4, A. M. Stockton1, D. M. Gentry5, A. Stevens6, G. Murukesan7, N. Chaundry8, T. Cullen8, W. Geppert4 and D. Cullen8, 1NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, USA (Morgan.L.Cable@jpl.nasa.gov), 2University of Washington, USA, 3University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Stockholm University, Sweden, 5Stanford University, USA, 6The Open University, UK, 7University of Turku, Finland, 8Cranfield University, UK.  Introduction: Our expedition, an international collaboration inspired by the participation of the 2012 NASA Nordic Astrobiology Summer School [1], focused on the habitability of Icelandic lava fields. These lava fields are excellent analogs for environments of astrobiological interest such as Mars [2, 3]. By studying the biodiversity and spatial variations of life in multiple lava fields, we aimed to establish a decision tree type methodology to determine the most promising sites for habitability. We hope this framework can be used to better inform current and future in-situ astrobiological investigations. Robotic in-situ sampling presents several challenges. Consumables (reagents, solvent, etc.) limit the number of samples that can be investigated. Processing constraints required by extraction techniques are dependent on the mission design and cannot be altered in the field. Even if biosignatures are present in a site of astrobiological interest, the spatial and environmental variation may rise and drop below detection thresholds. With limited samples and a fixed protocol, it is crucial to choose a representative set of sampling locations to maximize the possibility of detecting evidence of life, if it exists. One important question that can be explored at analog sites on Earth is the relationship between apparent homogeneity of a site and the habitability and biodiversity of that area. We selected lava field sampling locations such that a remote observer, or surface explorer, would interpret them as visually homogeneous with respect to color, grain size, roughness and temperature. We then used various field lab techniques to quantify the differences in gross microbial productivity and diversity over varying spatial scales at each lava field. Field Sites: Three lava fields, Fimmvörðuháls (63°38'N, 19°26'W), Eldfell (63°25'N, 20°14'W) on the island of Heimaey, and Laugahraun (63°59'N, 19°05'W) (Figure 1), were initially evaluated upon arrival to Iceland during the week of July 22, 2013. The sites were judged for their relevance to our scientific and exploration goals, as well as potential for anthropogenic contamination and future repeatability. Fimmvörðuháls (Figure 2) and Eldfell (Figure 3) were ultimately selected as our primary sampling sites given that: (a) their eruption dates are relatively similar - 2010 and 1973, respectively; (b) they had limited vegetation; and (c) they had very similar sediment types: basaltic tephra. The Laugahraun lava field, though geologically interesting, proved to be far too vegetated to collect homogeneous samples; futhermore the high tourist traffic decreased our confidence that those samples would not be contaminated by anthropogenic sources.   Figure 1. Context map for Icelandic sampling  locations.    Figure 2. Black box indicates Fimmvörðuháls  sampling location. N~100 km~30 kmNReykjavik!Hvolsvöllur Eldfell!Fimmvörduháls!LandmannalaugarGoogleEarthGoogleEarth~18 W~64 N~ 13 km~ 300 mN19˚ 17' W 63˚ 40' N MýradalsjökullEyja"allajökullFimmvörðuháls2721.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
 Figure 3. Black box indicates Eldfell sampling location on the island of Heimaey.  Field Sampling Methods:  Sampling sites were selected based on apparent homogeneity with evenly distributed basaltic tephra. A triplicate sample set was collected at each site, with each sample spaced 1 m apart. Subsequent sample sets were collected at distances of 10 m and 100 m. Each sample was taken from ~ 5 cm below the surface using sterile technique. Field Laboratory Protocols: Soil samples were stored at room temperature prior to analysis. Soil samples with large grain sizes (> 2 mm) were crushed using a sterile hammer or vise grip.  ATP Bioluminescence Assay. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) was quantified using the ATP Bioluminescence Assay Kit HS II and reader (Merck HyLiTE II) in triplicate for two aliquots of each soil sample.   Figure 4. Variation in ATP content with sampling distance for both lava field sites. Heterogeneity increases with distance for Eldfell (older lava field). Fluorescence Microscopy. Extracted cells were stained with SYBR Gold Nucleic Acid Gel Stain (Invitrogen) and imaged under 100x magnification using a Partec Cycscope with a 455 nm excitation source and 500 nm dichroic long pass filter. Cell counts were averaged from five images for each sample. Results: ATP was detected in all samples analyzed, indicating actively metabolizing microorganisms in every sample site of both locations. At Eldfell, the degree of variation of ATP content increased with distance (Figure 4). At Fimmvörðuháls, however, the difference in ATP content between two samples was similar, regardless of spatial separation. This is consistent with lava field age, in that the older lava field (Eldfell, 1973) has had more time to establish a complex microbial community, whereas the younger lava field (Fimmvörðuháls, 2010) is most likely still in the initial stages of microbial colonization. Cell count variation from the fluorescence microscopy assay did not exhibit the same dependence as ATP variation for either location. This may be due to the fact that the cell counts were low for most samples. This method was also subject to human error and difficult to implement in the field. Conclusions:  Our results are consistent with the interpretation that biological variability in geologically homogeneous sample sites varies with lava field age. Younger lava fields tend to show the same variation in biodiversity and habitability regardless of sampling proximity. Older lava fields are increasingly heterogeneous at larger spatial scales. This work has implications for field sampling and analysis of volcanic regions such as those on Mars. Given the ages of lava flows on this and other planetary bodies, we anticipate high variation in biodiversity between geologically homogeneous areas, should life exist. We therefore recommend a robotic sampling strategy with as many spatially separated sampling sites as practical, even in areas that appear homogeneous. Acknowledgments: Funding for MLC, ESA and ES was provided by the American Philosophical Society's Lewis and Clark Fund for Exploration and Field Research in Astrobiology with support from the NASA Astrobiology Institute. AMS was funded by the NASA Postdoctoral Program, administered by Oak Ridge Associated Universities through a contract with NASA. Government sponsorship acknowledged. References:[1] http://www.nordicastrobiology.net/ Iceland2012. [2] Warner N. H. and Farmer J. D. (2010) Astrobiology, 10, 523-547. [3] Mangold N. et al. (2011) Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 310, 233243. ~ 1 km20˚ 16' W 63˚ 25' N Island of HeimaeyN050010001500200025000 m 1 m 10 m 100 mATP assay standard deviationDistance between sample sitesEldfellFimmvörðuháls2721.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
