2781.PDF
Synthesis Pathways and Spectral Discrimination of Amorphous Ferric Sulfates on Mars. H. B. Jensen1 E. C. Sklute1, A. D. Rogers1 and R. J. Reeder1, 1Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, 255 Earth and Space Sciences Building (ESS), Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100, heidi.jensen@stonybrook.edu.  Introduction:  The combined observation by ChemMin and SAM instruments aboard the MSL Curiosity rover that 27% of the soil at Rocknest in Gale Crater is X-ray amorphous material and that this material contains both iron and sulfur [1] may be indicative of an amorphous ferric sulfate phase on the Martian surface. Xu et al. (2009) showed that amorphous ferric sulfate phases form when iron sulfate fluids are desiccated at low relative humidities (RH) such as those experienced on Mars [2]. Though some previous researchers have discussed formation of amorphous ferric sulfates in the process of examining stability fields of crystalline ferric sulfates [2-3], little attention has been given to the different formation pathways of amorphous sulfate. Here we synthesize amorphous ferric sulfate through 4 different formation pathways, and investigate the spectral properties and other characteristics of each amorphous product. We then assess whether there are path-dependent spectroscopic or structural differences between prodcuts. This information could be useful in distinguishing possible martian formation pathways if recognized in remote data sets. A companion abstract describes the spectral and morphological characteristics of amorphous iron sulfate phases (ferric and ferrous) and describes implications for MSL observations (Sklute et al.).  Methods: :  This work produces an amorphous ferric sulfate from crystalline starting materials by hydration by 2 different methods (humidity chamber, direct water addition) and dehydration by two different methods (humidity buffer and vacuum).  The monoclinic ferric sulfate (Fe2(SO4)3) used in this study was purchased from Alfa-Aesar (Puratronic®, 99.998%, metals basis) and was heated to 350 ºC for 2 hours to ensure its anhydrous nature prior to experiments. The anhydrous state and purity of this reagent was confirmed by XRD and thermogravimetric analysis. This anhydrous starting material was used due to its simple stoichiometry and high purity. The amorphous product was formed in laboratory temperatures and pressures by fully hydrating the starting material followed by controlled dehydration to form an amber that was easily ground to a powder. Complete hydration was achieved in two different ways: (1) by storage in a 92% relative humidity (RH) chamber (h); or (2) by adding DI water directly to the starting material and storing in a 90% RH chamber (w). Dehydration was also achieved in two ways: (1) by storage in an 11% RH chamber (d), or (2) by vacuum desiccation (v). If necessary, samples were stored in a humidity controlled glove box where the conditions did not exceed 12% RH prior to data collection. The amorphous nature of the products was confirmed both prior to and after data collection using a Scintag PAD-X X-ray Diffractometer. SEM analysis also confirmed that the products were an amorphous glass and not agglomerations of nanoscale crystalline particles. VNIR reflectance was collected on an ASD Fieldspec3 Max UV-VIS-NIR bidirectional spectrometer (referenced to spectralon, average of 300 scans) of the powders were collected at Stony Brook University’s Vibrational Spectroscopy Laboratory. Thermal emission spectra of the powders were collected at Stony Brook University’s Vibrational Spectroscopy Laboratory. Emissivity spectra were acquired from cooled, rather than heated, samples to avoid phase changes upon heating. Thermogravimetric (TG) analyses and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was conducted using a Netzsch STA Jupiter® simultaneous TG-DSC apparatus. To prevent crystallization, exposure to heat and high RH (>20% RH) was avoided. Results:    Figure 1. Cold emissivity spectra of the starting material along with the amorphous ferric sulfate powders created in 4 ways: (1) wetted and dehydrated using a humidity buffer chamber (AAPcwd); (2) hydrated and dehydrated in humidity buffer chambers (AAPchd); (3) wetted and dehydrated via vacuum (AAPcwv); and (4) hydrated using a humidity buffer chamber and dehydrated via vacuum (AAPchv). Cold Emissivity. The cold emissivity spectra collected for the amorphous powder samples along with that of the starting material can be seen in Figure 1. Most features observed can be attributed to sulfate transparency features that arise from volume scattering 2781.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
due to the fine particulate nature of the sample. Pressed pellets will be prepared for presentation at LPSC, with care being taken to assure that crystallinity is not induced. One notable observation is that bound water features (near ~1650 cm-1) that would be expected for the amorphous products and are not apparent/strong.   Figure 2. VNIR Reflectance spectra of the starting material, along with amorphous ferric sulfate powders created in 4 ways explained in Figure 1.  VNIR ASD Reflectance. The VNIR reflectance spectra for the 4 products and the starting material are plotted in Figure 2. The features at 1.4 and 1.9 µm attributable to water are consistent between all formation pathways, as are the ~1.2 µm iron spin forbidden crystal field transitions. There does appear to be a difference in the configuration of the Fe octahedron between the amorphous materials versus the starting material. TG/DSC data. The TG/DSC data for all 4 synthesized amorphous ferric sulfates were largely similar. The data for 2 samples are included below (Figure 3.). For all four amorphous ferric sulfates, there are 3 distinct water mass loss temperature ranges observed in the TG curve (from 30-~185ºC, ~185-~230ºC, and ~230-400ºC). After this point, all structural water has been removed from the samples and desulfonation begins. In the DSC curves for all four samples, there are 3 endothermic peaks corresponding to the water mass loss observed in the TG curve. The exception to this is observed in AAPcwd, which has an endothermic feature located at ~65ºC, that is attributed to surficial water and is not structurally signifigant.    Figure 3. TG and DSC curves for AAPcwd and AAPchv. Conclusions and Future Work:  This work has shown that the formation pathways of amorphous ferric sulfates can not be distinguished using IR spectroscopy. Future structural characterization using Pair Distribution Function (PDF) will be a necessary next step in order to elucidate any possible structural differences associated with the formation pathway used. This has been used in the past with other systems, such as amorphous silica and carbonate.  References: [1] Bish D. L. et al. (2013) Science, 34, 1238932. [2] Xu W. et al. (2009), Am. Mineral., 94, 1629-1637. [3] Wang et al. (2012) Icarus, 218, 622-643. 2781.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
