2784.PDF
A comparative study of Martian lobate debris aprons to assess regional differences in surface properties, morphology, and internal composition. E. I.Petersen1, J. W. Holt1, and J. E. Berney2, 1Institute for Geophysics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX(eric petersen@utexas.edu), 2Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX.Introduction: Lobate debris aprons (LDA) are Martian surface features first interpreted as ice-related dueto their characteristic convex-up topographic profiles andviscous flow morphologies [1, 2]. They are typicallyfound extending from the base of escarpments and mesasin both the northern and southern mid-latitudes, particularly in the high-relief dichotomy boundary region between Mars’s northern lowlands and the highlands comprising the rest of the planet.Orbital radar sounding of LDAs by the ShallowRadar (SHARAD) instrument on Mars ReconnaissanceOrbiter (MRO) has revealed unambiguous subsurface reflectors, analysis of which has shown that many of theseLDAs are composed of nearly pure water ice insulatedunder a blanket of dust and rock debris∼1-10m thick [3].Previous studies in geomorphology [4], climate modeling [5], flow modeling [6], and radar stratigraphy [7]have shown LDAs to be remnants of multiple obliquitydriven glacial cycles on Mars and thus valuable indicators of change in Amazonian palaeoclimate. It remainsto be shown, however, whether the character of these cycles is dominated by regional ice sheet formation and retreat or smaller, localized glacial deposits. Assessmentof regional variability in the LDA population may helpanswer this question.Figure 1: MOLA-derived map ofDeuteronilus/Protonilus Mensae with analyzedSHARAD ground tracks mapped as black lines,candidate subsurface reflectors under LDAs plottedin yellow. Selected LDA in eastern and westernDeuteronilus are highlighted in red boxes.Study Region and Methodology: SHARAD dataacquired over LDAs in the dichotomy boundary region ofDeuteronilus Mensae exhibit a spectrum in the strengthof observed subsurface reflectors, from strong and clearto more weak and ambiguous or even nonexistent returns. In general, western Deuteronilus is dominated byFigure 2: Selected LDA in western (A) and eastern (B) Deuteronilus displayed in daytime THEMISdata. SHARAD ground tracks displayed as dashed yellow lines; example radargrams (747202000 in A and715502000 in B) are highlighted. HiRISE footprintsare displayed by red boxes and flow-parallel topographicprofiles extracted from HRSC and MOLA elevation dataare displayed by blue lines.unambiguous returns, while eastern Deuteronilus contains relatively few, weak returns. In this study, we explore the possibility that all LDAs contain a basal icerock interface, yet the eastern LDAs do not permit theradar to observe the interface via one or both of two proposed mechanisms. The first mechanism is a differencein surface properties, such as roughness, that may prevent radar penetration in the eastern LDAs. The secondmechanism is a difference of internal composition, whichcould impact the attenuation of the radar signal. Variations in the dust-ice fraction could cause this, and wouldalso be significant in determining the ice rheology, andhence the flow history and resultant topographic profile.We test for the first mechanism by using highresolution imagery obtained from the MRO HiRISEand CTX camera systems to characterize LDA surfaces2784.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
2at each site and compare surface roughness estimates,albedo, and geomorphic characteristics. Correlation ofthese properties with SHARAD data may imply regionaldifferences in surficial radar properties.Topography data obtained from Mars Express’ HighResolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) and Mars Global Surveyor’s Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA) are usedto extract flow-parallel topographic profiles to comparebetween sites and against idealized flow models [8, 9].Correlation of differences in the convexness of observedflow-line profiles with differences in SHARAD data mayimply regional differences in internal radar properties,testing for the second proposed mechanism.Figure 3: SHARAD data (top panel) acquired over thestudy sites in western (a, line 747202000) and eastern(b, line 715502000) Deuteronilus Mensae. Middle panelis simulated surface returns/clutter over the same region,with nadir ground-track MOLA topography highlightedin yellow. Bottom panel is CTX/HiRISE imagery ofthe regions of interest with the nadir ground-tracks ofthe SHARAD data mapped in yellow. Indicated by thegreen arrow is an unambiguous subsurface reflector inthe western LDA; no subsurface reflectors are found inthe eastern LDA. Note the abundance of ‘knobs’ risingout of the eastern LDA complex, as well as the muchweaker LDA surface reflection.Preliminary Results and Discussion: Preliminaryresults indicate that the selected eastern LDA complexexhibited larger scale surface modification features thanthe western LDA, with depressions reaching an order of1-2km in diameter. Additionally, ‘knobs’ of rocky material at sub-mesa height are much more common in theeastern complex, where they are seen rising above or justat the LDA surface, diverting LDA flow and causing topographic depressions in their down-slope wake. Thesediffering structures, as well as differing geologic agesof adjacent highland surfaces between the east (moreancient Noachian geology) and west (less ancient Hesperian geology) could possibly contribute to a changein debris cover characteristics such as roughness. Theproposed mechanism of radar scattering off surface debris may also be supported by the fact that initial reflections off LDA surfaces on the eastern complex are muchweaker than on the western complex. Both LDAs exhibitsome evidence in the topography and imagery data formultiple overlying lobes of material, implying a complexstratigraphy which is not directly evident in the radar datayet may play a role in the differing radar observations.Figure 4: The mean normalized topographic profilesfrom HRSC data for the nine selected profiles on each ofthe eastern and western Deuteronilus LDAs are plottedhere against the results of a perfectly plastic model runto steady state [9]. Note that the eastern LDA appears tobe generally less convex than the western LDA.The mean normalized topographic flow profile on theeastern LDA complex was found to be generally less convex than that of the western LDA complex (see figure 4)in both HRSC and MOLA data. This could be due todiffering debris cover characteristics, resulting in variedtopographic modification due to near-surface ice sublimation. This could also be due to differing ice rheologies between the two complexes, pointing to the needfor future efforts in flow modeling and radar attenuationstudies to constrain differences in dust-ice content acrossthe LDA population.References: [1] Squyres, S. (1978), Icarus, 34(3),600-613. [2] Lucchitta, B. (1984), J. Geophys. Res.:Sold Earth, 89(S02), B409-B418, [3] Holt, J., et al.(2008), Science, 322, 1235-1238. [4] Head, J., et al(2006), Geophys. Res. Lett., 33(8). [5] Madeleine, J.B., et al. (2009), Icarus, 203(2), 390-405. [6] Fastook,J., et al. (2011), Icarus, 216(1), 23-29. [7] Quartini, E.,et al. (2011), LPSC Abstracts, 42, 2470. [8] Parsons, R.,et al. (2011), Icarus, 214(1), 246-257. [9] Li, H., et al.(2005), Icarus, 176(2), 382-394.2784.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
