2792.PDF
DETERMINING THE DUNE-CONSTRUCTING WIND REGIME IN EASTERN OLYMPIA UNDAE, MARS.  G. C. Garcia1 and L. K. Fenton2, 1The University of Texas-Pan American 1201 W. University Dr., Edinburg, TX 78539 (ggarciac@broncs.utpa.edu), 2SETI Institute, 189 Bernardo Ave, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.   Introduction:  Ewing et al. [1] looked in one area of Olympia Undae on Mars and found the dunes were influenced by two main winds: an older wind from the ENE that is responsible for creating large dune crestlines and a second younger wind from the NE that has begun to reorient the older crestlines and has produced secondary longitudinal dunes. This wind originated at Olympia Cavi, a scarp that has formed at the edge of Planum Boreum. The goal of this work is to determine the wind regime in eastern Olympia Undae. This study focuses farther east in Olympia Undae, where a similar pattern is evident in images, but where winds from Olympia Cavi are not likely to strongly influence bedform morphology. This is of interest beyond just aeolian morphology: the eastern portion of the sand sea is higher in gypsum abundance relative to the rest of Olympia Undae [2], and determining the wind regime there may help identify the origin of gypsum sand.  Figure 1. Eastern Olympia Undae in the north polar region of Mars. The green box represents the image analyzed in this work, and the yellow box indicates work previously conducted by [1]. Methods:  In order to get a mean crestline orientation, we mapped crestlines of dunes and ripples in our study area through the use of geographic imaging system (GIS) software, JMARS [3]. Focusing on High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) image ESP_027803_2605 (see Fig. 1, 2), we compiled four sets of bedform crestline data. Each set was classified based on morphology type, including primary and secondary dunes, coarse-grained ripples, and ~2 m wavelength sand ripples (see Fig. 2). Figure 3 shows resulting rose diagrams of the mapped crestlines binned by 10ยบ intervals. These results were then used to estimate the incident bedform-constructing winds. The concept of maximum gross bedform-normal transport dictates that the orientation of a bedform crestline is determined by all incident sand transporting winds [4]. If all winds of saltation strength are known, the resulting bedform trend can be predicted. In the case of planetary geomorphology, where wind measurements are lacking, it is necessary to invert the problem to solve for the wind regime. Using this technique bedform morphology and inferred wind directions can be used to estimate bedform constructing wind regimes [5].  Figure 2. A portion of HiRISE image ESP_027803_2605. Each line color represents a different set of bedforms.  The orange crestlines are primary dunes, green crestlines are secondary dunes, red lines are coarse-grained ripples, and the blue lines are sand ripples.   Figure 3. Rose diagrams showing crestline orientations for each set of lines mapped in GIS software, JMARS. The colors reflect the color set for each dune type: Orange is for primary dunes, green for secondary dunes, red for coarse-grained ripples, and blue for sand ripples. 2792.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Results: Starting with the oldest feature, the primary dune crestline orientation likely reflects a transverse dune formation made by the predominant easterly winds that have been prevalent throughout the Olympia Undae region for many years [1]. Maintaining a general north to south orientation, slipfaces are visible on the western side of most, if not all, of the peaks. The secondary dunes are less simple to interpret. As dunes grow large enough, it is possible for winds to become channeled between the structures and in turn begin to transform the morphology. Following the interpretation of [1], the secondary dunes appear to reflect a longitudinal pattern. This inference is based on the orientation of the coarse-grained ripples that appear within the troughs of the primary dunes. Since the coarse-grained ripples are relatively small features (~30 m wavelength), they may or may not reflect recent winds, as the grains are larger, and require either more force, or more time for formation. This is also assuming that the coarse ripples are transverse elements like the sand ripples. As of now, there is no evidence to prove that ripples are anything but transverse, but it is not wise to rule out the possibility of alternate methods of formation. Sand ripples, comprising the smallest accumulation of sediments in the area, indicate the most recent sand-transporting winds.  Discussion: From the rose diagrams, and inferences about the sand ripples, we can conclude a first wind vector from 95ยบ (red line in Figure 3). At this  Figure 4 IMGBNT for primary crestlines. The ESE wind was inferred from sand ripples; here it combines with a second wind depicted as a colored region. Red indicates a transverse regime, green is an oblique regime, blue indicates a longitudinal regime, and yellow is reversing. The bold region is the most likely set of possible second winds that could combine with the inferred ESE wind to create the observed primary dune crestlines. point, we know the primary dune bedform trend (black line in Figure 3), have inferred one wind vector, and now, using the method of IMGBNT, have come up with possible solutions for the second wind vector (shaded regions in Figure 3). The graph is expressed as transport ratio versus orientation. The middle radius circle represents a transport ratio of 1, meaning that both wind vectors have the same magnitude. Any larger radius represents a ratio where the unknown second wind is stronger than the ESE wind, and any smaller radius represents a ratio where the unknown wind is weaker than the ESE wind. From observation of the morphology, there is no indication of a wind coming from the SW direction, so every possible wind vector listed in the third quadrant of the histogram has been eliminated. Likewise, since the ESE wind appears to be the dominant wind vector, each possibility outside of the 1:1 radius has been eliminated. This leaves only the likelihood of a second wind from a NE direction that, at max, transports half the sand as the ESE wind, creating a transverse wind regime responsible for the formation of the primary dune crestlines in the area.   Conclusion: From comparison with other work within the Olympia Undae dune field, our results appear to differ significantly for the coarse-grained and sand ripples. The theory behind this suggests that a strong NE wind coming from Olympia Cavi is helping to significantly alter the dune morphology [1]. Since the study area that has been analyzed here is east of this erosional feature, we do not observe the influence of this strong wind. However, the secondary dunes that appear in both areas have a similar orientation. This leads to the idea that the secondary dunes are being created from another source. There could still be reason to believe that a NE wind is combining with the dominant easterly wind to create a longitudinal secondary dune, where the Olympia Cavi winds only aid in speeding up the process. Future work to be conducted is to get an IMGBNT histogram for the secondary dunes and compare it with the primary dune graph and see if there is evidence to support this theory. References: [1] Ewing, R. C., et al. (2010). J. Geophysical Res., 115, E08005. doi:10.1029/2009JE003526.  [2] Langevin et al. (2005). Science, 307, doi:10.1126/science.1109091. [3] Gorelick, N. S. (2003) LPSC XXXIV, Abst. #2057. [4] Rubin, D. M. & Hunter, R. E. (1987). Science, 237(4812), 276-8. doi:10.1126/science.237.4812.276. [5] Fenton, L. K. et al. (2013). Icarus, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2013.04.001     2792.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
