2807.PDF
A Large Vent Structure within Argyre Basin, Mars J.-P. Williams1, J. M. Dohm2,R. M. Lopes3, and D. L. Buczkowski4, 1Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, University of California, LosAngeles, CA, 90095, USA (jpierre@mars.ucla.edu), 2Earth-Life Science Inst., Tokyo Institute of Technology,Tokyo, Japan, 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Caltech., Pasadena, CA 91109, USA, 4Johns Hopkins University,Applied Physics Lab, Laurel MD 20723, USA.Introduction: The Argyre Basin, an impact basinin the southern highlands southeast of Tharsis at−51◦ S and 317◦ E, is one of the largest impactbasins on Mars with a diameter > 1200 km. Thebasin formed in the Early Noachian and has experienced a complex geologic history. The basin hasbeen a sink for volatiles and other materials experiencing a significant influx of sediments and partial infilling with water. Eolian activity has playeda substantial role in contributing to the present daymorphology of the basin floor. Detailed descriptions of the basin and its geologic history can befound in [1]. Here we describe a previously unidentified vent-like struture on the floor of Argyre.Description: The feature consists of a quasicircular rim of high-standing material forming aconic structure with a central, caldera-like pit witha diameter∼ 25 km (Fig 1). The flanks of the featureextend 10− 20 km from the rim. Steep, ridge structures are preserved on the north and south rimsforming the highest topography, while the rim topography is more subdued to the west with someevidence of sapping near the crest. The eastern sideof the feature is absent creating a horseshoe-likeshape in topography with the central depressionopening eastward. A smaller vent structure, possibly a parasitic cone, is observed on the northernflank (Fig 1). It is ∼ 5 km in diameter with a circular central depression ∼ 2 km diameter. Fine scalelayering, most apparent around the rim of the central depression, is fairly concentric to the depression however is appears to be deformed in placesby folding, reminiscent of soft sediment deformation.Volcanism: Volcanic landforms are abundant onMars and display a diversity of constructionalstyles. Jovis Tholus (18.41◦ N, 242.59◦ E) [2] provides an example of a shield structure of comparable vertical and horizontal dimensions with a complex caldera similar in scale to the central depression of the Argyre feature (Fig 2). The Ngorongoro Crater of northern Tanzania provides a terrestrial example of a volcanic shield structure andcaldera of comparable size and is one of nine PlioPleistocene volcanoes that comprise the Nogorongoro Volcanic Highlands (NVH) complex of theEast African Rift System [3].Given the geologic history of the Argyre basininvolving an aqueous and ice rich environment,phreatic and phreatomagmatic eruptions may haveplayed a role in forming the feature. Tuff cones,tuff rings, and maars result from the explosive interaction of magma with standing water or groundwater. These features however tend to be muchsmaller in scale. The largest known maars on Earth,the Espenberg Maars on the Seward Peninsula innorthwest Alaska, are 4− 8 km in diameter and resulted from a series of basaltic eruptions throughthick permafrost [4]. The largest tuff cones are theMenan Buttes in the Snake River Plain of southeastIdaho, part of a late-Pleistocene complex of basaltictuff cones [5], formed by a basaltic dike intrudinginto shallow water-saturated alluvium. The Menenbuttes are much smaller in scale however with elevations ∼ 250 m above the surrounding plains andbase diameters < 4 km in the widest dimensions.Tuff rings and cones have been tentatively identified in the Amenthes region of Mars [6] with thelarger cones of similar scale to the Menan Buttes.Mud volcanism: Fluid expulsion in compactingdeposits has been recognized to form volcanolike structures in terrestrial sedimentary basins,both onshore and offshore. Pore fluid pressurebuilds when the pressure cannot dissipate adequately through the sediment and can be focusedthrough fractures or zones of enhanced permeability to breach the capping layer. The extrusion offluid and entrained sediments can result in a coneshaped edifice, or mud volcano. Such a formation mechanism has been proposed for many of themounds observed in the lowlands of Mars (e.g. [7]).The Touragai Mud volcano in eastern Azerbaijan isconsidered to be one of the biggest onshore mudvolcanoes with a diameter ∼ 3 km and a heightof 500 m [8]. The lack of evidence for volcanismin the floor of Argyre basin and its water-rich, depositional history, makes mud volcanism an attractive hypothesis. Terrestrial mud volcanoes can havea conical shape and summit crater similar to volcanic cones; however, the feature in Argyre is muchlarger than the other candidate mud volcanoes onMars or identified on Earth.Impact origin: An alternate hypothesis is thatrather than being a constructional feature, it is a2807.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Figure 1: (a) THEMIS IR daytime mosaic color shaded with MOLA topography. Black lines outline topographic ridges, possible remnants of crater rim structures. (b) Smaller cone structure on the north flank ofthe edifice (CTX image: G13 023463 1283 XN 51S047W).remnant impact feature. The irregular, east-westelongation of the depression and flanks could bepartly due to differential erosion but could also result from an oblique impact. This would requiredeflation of the surrounding basin floor of & 500 mto explain the elevation of the rim. Eolian activityon the basin floor is evident with deflation and theaccumulation of dunes modifying the basin floor. Ifthe rim of the feature represents the approximate elevation of the basin floor at the time of an impact,i.e. the basin floor was & 500 m higher than thepresent-day level, this would require a removal of∼ 3.8× 1014 m3 of material from the basin interior.References[1] H. Hiesinger and J. W. Head. Topography and morphology of the Argyre Basin, Mars: implications forits geologic and hydrologic history. Planet. Space Sci,,50:939-981, 2002.[2] J. B. Plescia. Geology of the small Tharsis volcanoes:Jovis Tholus, Ulysses Patera, Biblis Patera, Mars.Icarus, 111:246-269, 1994.[3] G. F. Mollel, et al. Geochemical evolution of Ngorongoro Caldera, Northern Tanzania: Implications forcrust-magma interaction. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.,271:337-347, 2008.[4] J. E. Bege´t, et al. The largest known maars on Earth,Seward Peninsula, Northwest Alaska. Arctic, 49:6269, 1996.[5] S. S. Hughes, et al. Mafic volcanism and environmental geology of the eastern snake river plain, idaho. InS. S. Hughes and G. D. Thackray, editors, Guidebookto the Geology of Eastern Idaho, pages 143-168. IdahoMuseum of Natural History, 1999.[6] P. Brozˇ and E. Hauber. A unique volcanic field inFigure 2: Elevation profiles of Argyre feature andpossible analogs.Tharsis, Mars: Pyroclastic cones as evidence for explosive eruptions. Icarus, 218:88-99, 2012.[7] D. Z. Oehler and C. C. Allen. Evidence for pervasive mud volcanism in Acidalia Planitia, Mars. Icarus,208:636-657, 2010.[8] M. Bonini. Mud volcanoes: Indicators of stress orientation and tectonic controls. Earth Sci. Rev., 115:121152, 2012.2807.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
	Introduction:	Description:	Volcanism:	Mud volcanism:	Impact origin: