2808.PDF
ARTISTIC RESEARCH ON FREEDOM IN SPACE AND SCIENCE.   Ronald Schelfhout, co-authors: Bernard Foing, Evelina Domnich, Dmitry Gelfand, Edwin van der Heide.   Introduction:   Space science in the arts.  Since the earliest scientific preparations for extraterrestrial travel at the beginning of the 20th century, the exploration of outer space has become a quitessential framework of the human condition and its creative manifestations. Although the artistic pursuit of space science is still in its infancy, an accelerated evolution is currently underway.  This text was a part of the course description of the  ArtScience Research project in collaboration with ESA. The project got me interested in the dualistic aspect which clings to the exploration of the universe. Line of thought:  Space sounds like freedom but to actually send people out there they have to be strapped tightly on top of a giant missile to reach a habitat of interconnecting tubes with very little space. It is impossible to escape protocol without risking your life and the lives of astronauts have been fixed years in advance. This is the human predicament which does not apply to the telescopes and other devices used to reach far into the universe. Providing information instantly the various forms of light allow us to travel without moving.  Description of the installation:  The research on freedom in space and science led to the development of an installation which reflects this paradigm. The installation is a model on multiple scales. You can look at the material or the feeling it evokes as well as at the constantly changing projections. The image is provided by different lights orbitting a round table. The table itself also turns around its axis. On the surface of this round plane a circular array of glass and lenses is placed to diffract the light. Inside this glass circle there is a broken dome placed over a dark and reflective surface on which little light manipulating machines continuously alter the projected image. Development and perspective:  In order to delve deeper into the subject of freedom in space and science this setup can serve as a vantage point. And it can offer an interactive environment to explore notions of freedom in space and science.  Among the aspects that would need to be developed further are:  -the addition of a specific environment around and above the installation, referring to the fabric of space in a spherical shape.  -Incorporation of sound into the mechanics of the machinery. -Adjustment of the installation to interaction with an audience. Results:  The images displayed underneath depict the installation in some of the ways it can be experienced.  image1. UFO  image2. Settlement  image3. Broken Dome       References:   [1] Arthur R. Woods. (2007) Space Options for the 21st Century, Overview and Perspective. [2] Meike Wiedeman, Florian P.M. Kohn, Harald Roesner, Wolfgang R.L. Hanke. (2011) Selforganization and Pattern-formation in Neuronal Systems Under Conditions of Variable Gravity. [3] Jun Yang, Nicolas B. Cowan, Dorian S. Abbot. (2013) Stabilizing Cloud Feedback Dramatically Expands the Habitable Zone of Tidally Locked Planets. 2808.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Summary:   Artistic research on freedom in space and science .  With the current state of the planet and the development of technology, humankind has the ability to look from a greater distance to the damage that has been done. This offers potential in the form of early detection and prevention of disasters. Meanwhile our aim seems to be directed away from the earth into the universe. In the Space science in the arts project I tried to encapsulate the two viewpoints that tend to avoid eachother. We are still earthbound and that is our basis. A tree cannot grow tall without strong roots. Space, a promise of freedom..  Ronald D. P. Schelfhout   2808.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
