2814.PDF
DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW PLANETARY X-RAY FLUORESCENCE SPECTROMETER AND CODEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD SAMPLES FOR ON-BOARD CALIBRATION.  A. Dreißigacker1, E. Köhler1, O.Fabel1 and S. van Gasselt1 1Planetary Scienes and Remote Sensing, Institute of Geological Sciences, Freie Universität Berlin, 12249 Berlin, Germany, a30acker@.fu-berlin.de   Introduction:  The X-Ray Fluorescence Instrument (XRF-S) is being designed to quantitatively map the composition of planetary surface materials. Every planetary surface is constantly bombarded with highenergy solar X-Rays, so a constant ionization of the surface and emission of characteristic X-Rays takes place, XRF-S on a planetary orbiter provides direct energy-dispersive X-Ray fluorescence (EDX) measurements of these. Because the Sun is a highly variable radiation source, the intensity of the solar x-ray radiation has to be monitored constantly to determine the measurement energy the XRF-S measurement data is produced with [1;2].  The X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometer is developed to be employed preferably on future missions to the Moon, but also to the Galileian Satellites or any other planetary or asteroidal surface without an atmosphere in our solar system.  The XRF-S is intended to produce a detailed set of measurements of the chemical composition of the Moon with global coverage at a spatial resolution of 6 km/px (NA) and 12 km/px (WA). XRF-S will scan the Moon's surface in the X-ray spectral range of 500 eV to 10 keV (2.5 - 0.12 nm) with a spectral resolution of approximately 160 eV at 6 keV. At these conditions, elements with atomic numbers 9 - 32 and K-lines in the range 500 eV - 10 keV should be observable even in low concentrations, heavier elements with atomic numbers 33 - 80 should be partly observable in high concentrations, due to their L-lines. XRF-S will provide data for global and regional map generation of the chemical composition of the moons surface, especially to map concentrations of the main mineral- (and therefore rock-) forming elements with atomic numbers 9 – 32, in particular Na, Mg, Al, Si, K, Ca, Ti, Mn, Fe. This should potentially include further heavier elements, in particular Ni, Co, Cu, S, P, Rb, Sr, U, Th, and SEEs. At mapping elemental abundance and chemical concentrations, XRF-S shall reach the 0,1% to 100ppm limit of detection common in terrestrial EDXRF-Spectrometers. Scientific Objectives: Various passive XRFSpectrometers were successfully used on missions to planterary bodies and asteroids, among these some XRF-S utilized PIN-diode detectors, and other XRF-S instruments with new SCD detectors. Whereas the older XRF-S held no calibration sources, the majority of XRF-S instruments on the more recent missions had additional detectors for direct monitoring of the incident solar X-rays, with varying success. Only a minority of XRF-S on recent missions monitored the incident solar X-rays indirectly by an additional detector measuring the emittance of a calibration sample. [3,4,5,6]. 1 Spatial resolution of XRF-S on an Orbital Platform vs. Orbit height  XRF-S will use a new generation of SCDs and an Indirect Solar Monitor for on board calibration of the data, hence being able to deliver data with higher spatial and spectral resolution than before, hence enable the detailed discrimination and geochemical characterization of geologic units onto planetary surfaces[6]. Instrumentation of XRF-X:  The XRF-S experiment package consists of three subsystems: (1) the main instrument targeting the moon's surface, (2) a zenithpointing solar monitor (ISM) which incorporates calibration targets , and (3) a platform for rotation and tilting, to  2 Laboratory assembly of SCD with X-Ray filter and cooling point the main instrument's collimator to each desired direction. XRF-S is developed using large-area swept charge devices (SCD) to allow for high X-Ray returns, 2814.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
single photon counting and on-board histogramming of X-ray spectra. A scalable and modular design allows for instrument adaptions to, e.g., desired resolution and sun emission intensities and to weight and power consumption constraints. The XRF-S-ISM is a miniature edition of the main instrument, positioned on the opposite site of the orbiter – so if the main instrument is pointed moonwards, the ISM will be pointed towards the sun. The ISM is constructed with the same type of SCD detectors and data processing software, a single detector is pointed to each specific sample. The ISM design holds all samples in a planar alignment in symmetric or triaxial order – for 2 or 3 samples respectively - and at least one of the samples is completely illuminated  Calibration with Indirect Solar Monitor:  The measurement principle is based on the synchronous measurement of the fluorescence of the Moons surface by the main instrument (XRF-S) and the emitted X-Ray spectra of the calibration targets by the XRF-S-ISM subinstrument. By monitoring incident Solar X-ray (and possible particle flux) with an ISM, quantitative measurements can be obtained, while minimizing the risk of detector overload and damage during extreme solar events like high-energy Flares and solar particle storms.  The XRF-S-ISM carries 2 or 3 flat sample sheets (areas of 3-9 cm2 , mass well below 45 g per sample), whose composition is well known and resembles the average composition of a lunar rock or regolith type (e.g. lunar maria basalt or highland anorthosite)[1,2]. These samples are the chemical calibration targets for the chemical composition and elemental abundance measurements done by XRF-S under varying ionization energy. Development of Calibration Samples We are developing the profile of requirements for samples for onboard correction and calibration for the XRF-S, this includes the development of the construction concept, the determination of the sample-manufacturing method, the manufacturing and testing process of the calibration targets.  We will determine the measurement energy and their spectra of variability expected in different mission periods. Therefore we will calculate on the basis of the long- and short-time variation of the solar radiation and energy spectra, which elements can be detected at which precision on which spectral line during the solar maximum, the solar Minimum, and the solar flares [1,2].  The sample manufacturing method is dicated by parameters like chemical composition, mineralogy, technical requirements of the XRF-Spectrometry method (no contamination, minimizing of noise and bias), durability and endurance in deep space environment and requirements through regulations for Planetary Protection [7, 8, 9]. All parameters’ influence onto sample properties and XRF-Spectrometry measurement is analyzed and quantified. For determing the adequate manufacturing method we will analyze which lunar rocks are suited for analogue construction, and also meet the technical requirements and those for XRF-S calibration. The constructional requirements for the samples - number, the exact mass, thickness and shape, surface roughness, type of sample holders - will be further specified to detail in the ongoing instrument development. We will compile a catalogue of requirements which the fight model of the calibration samples have to fulfill, subsequently improving the manufacturing method to meet the demands of a minimum sample service life of 4 years, with durability under physical stress like degassing in vacuum, acceleration, temperature variation of 130°C to -160°C, constant exposure to high-energy radiation and particle bombardment of the solar wind [1,2]. Further on we will improve the method of samplemanufacturing to meet also the demands of durability under extreme physical stress like horizontal and lateral acceleration during launch [10]. Further on, we will conduct a series of  of prototype-production and codevelopment and evaluation of testing methods. Prototypes will undergo extensive testing (e.g. polarization microscopy, electron microprobe analysis (EPMA), environmental stress tests (e.g. vibration, temperature and pressure tests) and XRF-Analysis). Subsequently we will choose the final, best suited of the Prototypes to be manufactured as Advanced Prototype. The composition of the advanced prototype will be determined using high-precision measurements (using e.g. EPMA, EDXRFS and XRFS flight model) and will serve as a calibration standard. This will also include statistical analysis of measurement characteristics and quantification of other error sources.  Acknowledgements:  Development is funded by the German Aerospace Agency under grant 50 JR 1303., References: [1] Gillis, J.J. et al (2006): New views of the Moon, Rev. Min.& Geochem. 60. [2] Heiken,G.H.(1991): Lunar SourceBook. [3] Schlemm, E.C. III. (2007) Space Sci Rev(2007) 131: 393-415 [4]Okada, K.S. et al. (2005)LPSXXXVI, Abstract ‘1174 [5] Grande, M. et al.(2009a) Plan Space Sci, 57 717-724 [6] Holland, A. and Pool, P. (2008) Proc. SPIE 7021, 702117. [7] United Nations (2002): U.N. Doc. A/RES/2222/(XXI). [8] Rummel, J. D., et al. (2002): COSPAR. [9] NASA (2012): JPL D-72356. [10] Arianespace (2006): Soyuz Users Manual. 2814.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
