 COMPARING LIBS SPECTRA FROM CHEMCAM INSTRUMENT ON BOARD CURIOSITY (MSL) : HOW  DIFFERENT  CAN  THEY  BE  AND  STILL  BE "THE  SAME" ?.  Éric L  EWIN  1,  Jérémie LASUE2, Olivier  FORNI2,  Bob  TOKAR3,4,  Diana  BLANEY5,  Noureddine  MELIKECHI6,  Olivier  GASNAULT2,  Sylvestre MAURICE2,  Roger  WIENS4,  the  ChemCam  team  and  the  MSL  team,  1ISTerre  (OSUG  :  uJF-Grenoble  & INSU.CNRS),  Grenoble.FR (<Eric.LEWIN@uJF­Grenoble.fr>),  2IRAP,  Toulouse.FR,  3PSI,  Tucson.AZ. USA, 4LANL, Los Alamos.NM.USA, 5JPL.NASA/CalTech, Pasadena.CA.USA, 6Delaware State Univ., Dover.DE. USA. Introduction: From a metrological point of view, instrumental uncertainty is estimated with experiments of reproducibility defined through a protocol that refer directly  or  indirectly  to  standards  obtained  through highly  accurate  and  highly  precise  measurements. However  for  planetary  field  instruments,  operation conditions do  barely even  approach  laboratory  ones, and  reproducibility  as  well  as  accuracy  are  much harder  to assess. In  the case of an instrument that  is destructive of the measured sample of the target, such as  the laser  induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) instrument ChemCam [Wiens, 2012; Maurice,  2012], one  can  resort  to  homogeneous  calibration  targets [Fabre,  2011;  Vaniman,  2012;  Tokar,  2013]  such as those on board Curiosity.  However, since distance of operation  is  an  important  effective  parameter [Melikechi,  2013],  the  specific  proximity  of  the ChemCam  calibration  targets  (~1.5m)  relative  to normally  operated  ones  (>2.8  m)  requires  an  added modeling  step,  distance  correction,  which  therefore hampers direct application of reproducibility results to field sample measurements. Another  approach  is  to  look  at  apparently homogeneous targets, such as fine-grain soils ([Blaney, 2013]) or the so-called omnipresent martian fine dust [Melikechi,  2013].  Statistical  dispersion  studies  on acquired  spectra  sets  for  such  targets  thus  permit  to analyze  their distance induced intensity shifts  and to define an upper bound level for the minimal variability in  a  repeatability  "on-field"  experiment.  Thus,  the improved  analysis  of  the  LIBS  spectra  derives principally  from  our  ability  to  measure  in-situ  the behavior of specific emission lines with distance, and to predict quantitatively the correction needed. A third approach, slightly different from the previous one is to look at spectra sets of the spot target basis and exhibit those with particularly low dispersion level. Once  the  instrumental  reproducibility  level  is quantified, it can be compared with the dispersion level over a set of spectra from different spots on a single geological target or from different rocks or soils. This permits to assess the chemical heterogeneity of a rock, of a geological unit, of a planetary traversed landscape. The statistical tool for processing such comparisons is called  ANOVA, stated  for  "ANalysis  Of  VAriance". The  multivariate  essence  of  the  LIBS  spectral  data brings  some  technical  difficulty  for  applying  this technique  straightforwardly.  One  of  this  is  that variance is mathematically defined as a square definite positive matrix with 6144 rows and lines (ChemCam spectra  are  defined  over  6144  =  3*2048  channels encompassing three spectral ranges). Since many LIBS spectral channels are highly correlated, either that they are oversampling a singular  spectral  line,  or  because they are sampling different spectral lines of the same chemical element, etc., the true dimensionality of this variance  matrix  is  much  smaller.  Mathematically,  in the case of an optimal instrumental reproducibility test, this dimensionality is maximal. This work will present a  first  attempt  to  estimate  the  minimum  admissible boundary value for this dimension. Another important aspect of statistical comparison of multivariate data is to define a metric of the spectral space in order to permit the definition of a (generalized euclidean)  distance  (or  metric)  between  two spectra. Classically, two options are considered. The first one, which we can call the photonic distance considers the straightforward  quadratic  sum  of  the  difference  in intensity for the two spectra over the whole channels set. In  this case,  each channel intensity is defined in term  of  photons  per  wavelength  unit  range  (per nanometer  ;  the  wavelength  width  of  ChemCam spectrometers channels are constant inside each of the three subsets, UV, VIS and VNIR, but are somewhat different  between  these  three).  Practically  these intensities are not used in their absolute values, but are rather  normalized  to  the  total  intensity  over  each respective wavelength subrange. The second option for defining  the  distance  between  two  spectra  is  the statistical  Mahalanobis  distance,  or  at  least  its  more classical  much  simplified  version  the  normalized euclidean distance, for which the intensity difference is normalized  by  the  respective  standard  deviation estimated  with  the  whole  set  of  spectra  under consideration.  Classical  multivariate  analysis techniques use this option, which therefore yield  the same  statistical  weight  for  each  channel,  either  it belongs  to  a  spectral  line  or  it  is  purely  noise. Advantage  to  the  former  channels,  those  partially covering  a  spectral  line,  comes  from  correlations   which somehow aggregate these channels and enforce their statistical weight as a group. A third option is to define  the  multispace  metric  from  metrological  or geochemical  considerations  [Allègre,  1987,  EPSL  ; Allègre,  1995, EPSL].  In  this work,  we will  use the reproducibility  previously  defined  for  such  purpose. With  this,  each  channel  is  given  a  weight  which corresponds to its reproducibility, therefore accounting instrumental  uncertainty  with  a  more  rigourous approach. 