 Measuring Heat Flow on Venus: Instrumentation and Rationale, S.E. Smrekar1, M. Pauken1, P. Morgan2, J. Chase, and J-P. Fleurial, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology (Mail Stop 183-501, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena CA, 91109; ssmrekar@jpl.nasa.gov), 2 CO Geol. Survey/CO School of Mines.    Abstract: A key question for understanding the evolution of Venus and rocky terrestrial planets in general is how does Venus lose its heat? Interior heat flow provides essential constraints on the thermal and chemical evolution of planetary bodies. Current models of the interior evolution of Venus have heat flux predictions ranging from 10 to 60 mW/m2.  Our goal is to measure heat flux to ±5 mW/m2.  Venus' thick atmosphere results in a surface temperature that varies by no more than 1°C.  Thus the heat flow on Venus can be measured using a flux plate method. Introduction: Motivation: Venus is currently in a stagnant lid convective regime, and lacks a magnetic field.  The stagnant lid may act to insulate the interior, leading to mantle heating. Heating of the mantle could lead to both shutting off the dynamo and to enhanced surface heat flux.  A very low heat flow (<20 mW/m2) would indicate that either a recent stagnant lid or a very late stage of episodic global overturn is operating [1-3]. An intermediate value of heat flow (2040 mW/m2) would be consistent with a stagnant lid modulated by convective heat flux [4]. High values (> 40 mW/m2) would indicate a thinner lithosphere and possibly a long period of mantle heating due to the effect of an insulating stagnant lid  [5].  Approach: Heat flow estimates are typically acquired by measuring the thermal gradient and conductivity in the subsurface in order to either measure or get below near surface temperature variations.  The uniformity of temperature at Venus' surface means that subsurface access is not required for heat flow measurement. Instead the heat flow out of the interior can be measured at the surface using a flux plate.   A flux plate sensor consists of a sandwich of two high conductivity layers at the top and bottom of the sensor and a low thermal conductivity layer in the middle as shown in Figure 1. The two conductive layers create a uniform temperature across the width of the sensor. The high conductivity layers are made from copper plates. The bottom copper plate is bonded to a graphite plate that is the support structure for a conformal interface pad made of long carbon fibers that contact the surface.   The low conductivity layer in the middle  amplifies the heat flux signal by creating a measureable temperature gradient between the top and bottom surfaces. The thermally resistive layer is made of an array of n- and p-type semiconductor elements. The thermoelectric array amplifies the temperature gradient signal to provide greater accuracy than traditional thermopile measurements for heat flux.  An insulating ring surrounds the sensor and the interface pad to reduces heat losses in the radial direction. This creates one-dimensional heat flow through the sensor element. The heat flow through the sensor is derived from Fourier's equation using the known conductivity in the center layer and the temperature gradient across the two outer layers. Challenges: The key challenges to measuring heat flow on Venus are: 1) operation at high temperatures, 2) achieving good thermal contact for a range of surface roughnesses, and 3) acquiring a high precision measurement within a short mission duration.  In this work, we develop a design to address issues 2 & 3.  Other researchers are developing high temperature electronics to address issue 1.   Fig 1.  Cross section of a flux plate schematic.  An array of thermoelectric elements (silver) measures the temperature gradient through the sensor. Two copper plates (brown) minimize surface temperature variations.  A carbon fiber pad  (black) contacts the surface. Exterior insulation (grey) reduces radial heat loss.  Surface Irregularity: The Venera landers have provided a glimpse of the surface of Venus in several locations.  The Venera 13 landing site is quite rocky, but other sites show relatively a low abundance of pebbles and rock fragments.  Instead they have plate-like surfaces consistent with high viscosity basalt flows.  The carbon fiber interface is designed to facilitate heat flow measurement on the Venus surface in the presence of irregularities up to 1 cm in height. Accommodating this size of irregularity provides an acceptable level of risk based on analysis of the size frequency distribution of loose materials on the surface [7] and the assumption that multiple heat flux sensors will be deployed on the surface,  Surface Conditions: The harsh environment of Venus (460°C, 90 bars, supercritical CO2) mean that passively cooled landers  will live no more than several hours.  We examine the ability to achieve thermal  equilibrium and measure the gradient within this time period by examining a model of flux plate behavior and comparing with the behavior of the breadboard. Approach: The focus of our development is the development of a bread board flux plate that has the ability to achieve a good thermal contact with a reasonable rough surface and measure the thermal gradient rapidly and precisely.   Thermal Contact. Our approach to achieving a good thermal contact is to use a carbon fiber mat (see Figure 2). The interface pad is carbon velvet material made from high conductivity fibers that are assembled by electroflocking and rigidized by carbon vapor deposition. The all carbon interface pad is capable of handling very high temperatures in a non-oxidizing environment.  On Venus, the CO2 atmosphere can penetrate the carbon fibers and increase the conductivity. We tested the quality of the thermal coupling to an irregular surface by measuring conductivity across the pad as a function of the fractional area of the pad in contact with surface.  The conductivity is measured under standard temperature and pressure in a divided bar apparatus in which a carbon mat is held against a surface with variable roughness.   Results of the conductivity testing show that the thermal resistance of the interface pad increases by 60% as the surface area in contact with the pad decreases from 100 to 5%.  Although this increase in thermal resistance may be permissible (still allow accurate measurement of the gradient across the flux plate with in several hours), we are examining several options to make the carbon mat more conformable to the surface. Greater conformability will effectively decrease the thermal resistance of the pad by allowing it to have greater contact with an irregular surface. Measuring the Thermal Gradient. We will use an array of N and P - type semiconductor thermoelectric elements to measure the transient and steady state temperature gradient through the sensor to determine the planet surface heat flux.  Heat flux measurements using a transient temperature response are made by precooling the sensor by applying a voltage to the thermoelectric array, taking advantage of the Peltier effect. The Peltier capability of the sensor allows it to be precooled to a known temperature, causing a unique transient response to the input heat flux.  Precooling allows for multiple measurements to be made over an extended sampling period. The sensor provides a temperature measurement accuracy of 1 mK. Modeling shows that a 20 µv difference corresponds to a measurement precision of 5 mW/m2. Initial measurements of heat flux conducted under vacuum conditions (Fig. 3) validated the ability to measure low heat fluxes and the effect of precooling is illustrated in the data shown in Fig 4. Next Steps: On going measurements will further validate performance. The next step is testing with the integrated carbon fiber pad in a test apparatus with heat flow though sand.  This testing is aimed at demonstrating 5 mW/m2 sensitivity, down to 30 mW/m2 flux (the current laboratory test limit). A high fidelity thermal model will be used to calibrate laboratory experiments and extrapolate the performance to a range of surface conditions and heat fluxes.  The demonstration article is scalable  to an array of ~100 N- and P-type semiconductor element pairs, providing 100 times greater sensitivity than the prototype sensor.   Acknowledgements: This research was carried out at Jet Propulsion Laboratory/Caltech, and was supported by Planetary Instrument Development and Definition Program funding. References: [1] Parmentier, E. M., and Hess P. C., (1992) Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 2015-2018. [2] Turcotte, D. L. (1993) J. Geophys. Res., 98, 17,06117,068. [3] Solomatov, VS., and. Moresi L.N (1996) J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 101, 4737-4753. [4] Phillips, R.J et al. (1997) in Venus II, Univ. Arizona Press. [5] Reese, C. C. et al. (1999) Icarus, 139, 67-80, doi:10.1006/icar.1999.6088. [6] Garvin J. B. et al. (1984) J. Geophys. Res., 89, B5, 3381-3399. Figure 2. Carbon fiber interface pad, 8 cm diameter by 1 cm thick, bonded to graphite pad for testing. Fig.	  	  4.	  Test	  results:	  50	  mW/m2	  	  flux	  for	  two	  initial	  precool-­ing	  states:	  -­-2	  and	  -­-4	  °K	  of	  precooling.	   <	  Fig.	  3.	  Bell	  Jar	  Test	  of	  Flux	  Plate	  with	  aerogel	  potting	  of	  TE	  legs.	  (Bell	  Jar	  is	  removed	  for	  clarity). 