2832.PDF
THE FRUITFUL MARRIAGE OF ART AND SCIENCE. M. A. Morris1, L. A. J. Garvie1,M.Dock2, R. Hines1 and M. Wadhwa1,3. 1Center for Meteorite Studies, Arizona State University, Tempe,AZ 85287. 2Tempe Cultural Services/Tempe Center for the Arts, Tempe, AZ 85281. 3School of Earth andSpace Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287. (melissa.a.morris@asu.edu).Introduction:The Center for Meteorite Studies (CMS) at Arizona State University (ASU) houses a unique andsignificant collection of meteorites comprising over30,000 individual specimens from more than 2,000distinct meteorite falls and finds. As a world-classresearch and educational institute, the Center iscommitted to the curation, distribution, and exhibition of this material for scientific research, education, and public outreach. As part of our education and public outreach (EPO) efforts, the Centerparticipates in various on-campus events, such asASU's Night of the Open Door, Earth and SpaceExploration Day, Homecoming Block Party, andthe monthly Earth and Space Open House. Theseevents bring in approximately 20,000 visitors. Scientists with the Center also frequently travel to local astronomy and rock/mineral clubs to presenttalks, providing touchable specimens. In order toreach and inform an even wider audience, CMS recently partnered with the City of Tempe/TempeCenter for the Arts to design and participate in exhibitions that combine art and science. These exhibitions will be hosted at the Tempe Center for theArts, the Tempe Public Library, and the U.S. PostOffice on Mill Ave. in Tempe, Arizona.Tempe Center for the Arts:From January 17 through June 8, 2014, TheTempe Center for the Arts (TCA) will present anexhibition entitled "American Pop: Comic Booksto Science Fiction". This exhibition for all ageshighlights the ongoing popularity of satire, fantasyand escapism in the worlds of comics, graphic novels, gaming, toys, television, movies and more, andhow American Pop has informed and been informedby science. Artisitic displays include materials fromlocal and national collectors as well as original artand limited edition pieces from some of America'sfavorite pop culture icons. Scientific displays include exhibits specific to the Moon, Mars, and meteorites. CMS will provide samples of lunar, martian, and other meteorites to be displayed in each ofthese exhibits. The Center's "Meteorite Fun Time"quiz will be available via iPad for the duration ofthe exhibition. As a part of the meteorite display, artistic and informative digital images of meteorite sections produced by CMS Collection ManFigure 1: Optical and reflected-light images of sectionsof the (Eucrite-mmict) meteorite Ibitira, the (H5) meteorite Franconia, and the (Eucrite-mmict) meteorite RanchoBlanco (L-R). Images courtesy of L.A.J. Garvie.ager, Laurence Garvie, will be displayed as threelarge banners, measuring 44" x 204" each, on a 12'wide by 29' high wall space (Figure 1). A raﬄewill be conducted at the end of the exhibition for a12-person meteorite vault tour (6 tickets for two),to be hosted after June 8. As a part of this innovative exhibition, TCA also partnered with ASU'sCenter for Science and the Imagination to interviewASU scientists regarding the inspiration they havereceived from American popular culture. The interview of CMS Assistant Director, Melissa Morris,will be displayed at TCA and can also be foundonline here http://csi.asu.edu/tca-pop/. A collection of Dr. Morris's science fiction-related personalitems will also be on display. Each Friday eveningfrom January 17 through June 8, TCA will host SciFi Friday, including a talk on subjects from roboticsto game design to planetary imaging. On April4, 2014, Dr. Melissa Morris will present the SciFi Friday talk entitled, "ROCKS FROM SPACE!".2832.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Figure 2: Pencil drawing Wilhemena the Wooly Mammothby Melissa A. MorrisThe "American Pop: Comic Books to Science Fiction" exhibition at the Tempe Center for the Arts isestimated to receive approximately 10,000 visitors.Further details can be found at the following website: http://www.tempe.gov/index.aspx?page=661.Tempe Public Library:An exhibition at the Tempe Public Library isplanned to open in March 2014 and will run forapproximately one year. The exhibition encompasses a large area of wall and floor space outsideof the Children's Library. The display will focuson Arizona's Meteor Crater and the Canyon Diablo meteorite. Two pedestals will be provided bythe library to display specimens of Canyon Diabloprovided by CMS. CMS will also provide graphics and a painting (sketch depicted in Figure 2) byCMS Assitant Director, Melissa Morris, designed totell the story of Meteor Crater through art and science. For a longer-term display, CMS will providea large (330 lb.), touchable iron meteorite (Nantan,courtesy of donor Frederic Stephan) and associatedgraphics, for installation in the Children's Library.Children's books related to meteoritics will be displayed adjacent to the exhibit. These exhibitions atthe Tempe Public Library are estimated to receivenearly one million visitors every year.U.S. Post Office:Tempe Cultural Services (TCS) maintains exhibit space at the US Post Office on Mill Ave. inTempe, Arizona. TCA and CMS are in the initialplanning stages for an exhibition that will beginsometime in the fall of 2014 and will run 4 months.The exhibition will consist of images and graphicsonly, visible from both inside and outside the postoffice. CMS Collections Manager, Laurence Garvie,is already planning artistic and informative imagesfor this display. The exhibition space at the U.S.Post Office on Mill Ave. receives approximately 5million visitors per year.Conclusion:The Center for Meteorite Studies at ArizonaState University has partnered with Tempe Center for the Arts to develop exhibitions that helpthe Center in its mission to inform and educate thepublic about the science of meteoritics and spacescience, through the combination of art and science. In so doing, CMS is able to reach a largerpublic audience than would otherwise be possible.These types of collaborations are essential to fosterscientific understanding in members of the generalpublic, as well as a life-long wonder in the beautyof the universe.2832.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
