2856.PDF
DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION OF HEAT FLOW PROBE FOR THE PRECISE MEASUREMENT OF LUNAR AND PLANETARY HEAT FLOW.   Y. Horikawa1,2 , S. Tanaka1, N. Sakatani1,2, J. Takita1,3, and K. Ogawa3. 1ISAS/JAXA (3-1-1 Yoshinodai, Chuo-ku, Sagamihara-shi, Kanagawa, 252-5210, JAPAN, horikawa@planeta.sci.isas.jaxa.jp), 2The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), 3Tokyo University (7-3-1 Hongou, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, JAPAN)   Introduction:  Crustal heat flow of terrestrial planets and the satellites is the thermal energy escaping from interior to the surface. The internal heat source is mainly derived from heat production by radioactive decay in solid bodies. From the measured heat flow value, bulk abundance of radioactive elements such as U, Th, and K can be estimated [1]. Therefore, precise measurements of heat flow value contribute to a better understanding of bulk composition and thermal history of solid bodies.  The heat flow value of the planets is estimated by various methods such as theoretical calculation and remote sensing, but in-situ precise measurement must be the most reliable. The in-situ measurements of extraterrestrial heat flow were conducted by the Apollo 15 and 17 missions on the moon. However, the estimated heat flow values may have large uncertainty due to the settings of the probe, top of which was exposed and the probe depth was not enough to avoid the diurnal or annual temperature changes. In order to solve these problems, a high speed penetration probe which can be buried into a depth of 1 to several meters, has been developed. Since the shock durability at the penetration is required prior to the scientific measurements, the heat flow sensors are installed on the surface of the penetrator which must be influenced by disturbances of temperature distribution around the penetrator due to the large difference of thermal conductivities between the penetrator and the surrounding regolith [2]. In this study, our goal is to estimate bulk composition and thermal evolution of solid bodies by measuring heat flux with an uncertainty better than 10%. In this paper, we focus on the development of thermal conductivity probe of the regolith.  Recently, needle probe sensors have been investigated to utilize for the measurement of thermal conductivity of the regolith [3, 4]. It may be applicable to deploy on the high speed penetrator if an extension mechanism is developed. In addition, the temperature sensing part is required to be placed at as a far distance as possible from the penetrator body in order to avoid the thermal disturbance. Here, we propose a “modified type of “ needle probe whose sensing part is not at the center but at the tip part [5]. We developed a prototype model of the sensor and evaluated the performance using regolith simulant materials under vacuum condition. Experiments: The prototype of the “needle probe” consists of a nichrome wire providing heat, a K-type thermocouple measuring temperature of the heater, a stainless pipe as the needle probe’s sheath, and epoxy resin fixing the wire and the thermocouple in a stainless pipe. We designed suitable sizes of inner and outer radius of the SUS tube to be 1.6 and 2.0mm respectively so as to penetrate in the regolith at a depth of several meters. The length of the sensor is 10cm which is the equivalent size of inner diameter of the penetrator body. In this study, as the regolith simulant material, we used glass beads of uniform size distribution (90106µm) and porosity of about 42%. Thermal conductivity of the glass beads under 200Pa can be controlled to be about 0.02W/m/K, which is almost the same thermal conductivity of the lunar environment at a depth of 1 to several meters.  The needle probe was placed at the center of the sample container and surrounded by three sets of line heat source conductivity sensors [6] for reference calibration. Fig.1 and 2 shows schematic experimental configuration.  Fig.1 Schematic of cross-section of sample container on 3cm from upper surface seen from above.  Fig.2 Experimental configuration and sample container seen from side.    2.0cm  Rotary Pump Turbo Molecular Pump  0 degC Standard Device Power Supply Digital Multimeter PC Vacuum Chamber Sample Container 2856.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Experimental results: Under 200Pa, we obtained 0.0207 ± 0.0008W/m/K by the average values of three line heat source sensors. The temperature difference was identified between temperature profiles of the theoretical solution [5] and experimental data, although thermal conductivity of both temperature profiles is the same 0.0207W/m/K (Fig.3). It is considered that the temperature difference comes from the difference condition between the theory and the experiment, such as the diameter of sensors, the thermal contact between sensor and glass beads, and axial heat flow. Simulations: To make consistent with the temperature profiles in the theory and the experiment, we made the same models of sensors as each condition of the theory and the experiment, and conducted the heattransfer simulation. We confirmed the agreement with the temperature profiles of the theory and the simulation whose model condition is the same as the condition of the theory. In addition, we performed the sensitivity analysis of modifying thermal properties of the model within 10% so as to make more consistent with the experimental data. Comparison with experimental and simulation results, and discussions: Fig.4 shows the temperature profiles of after conducting the heat-transfer simulation and performing the sensitivity analysis, and the experimental data. Both temperature profiles are good agreement at later times. The uncertainty of thermal conductivity within 1000s to 6000s is about 4.7%, which includes standard deviation between the temperature profiles of the simulation and the experiment, and the uncertainty of the input power into a nichrome wire. Considering that heat flow is a product of thermal conductivity and thermal gradient, and the required uncertainty of heat flow is better than 10%, the uncertainty of thermal conductivity is required to be better than about 5%. The uncertainty of thermal conductivity at later times meets this requirement. However, the uncertainty of thermal conductivity at all times is about 11.9%. The factor of the uncertainty is considered to be the grid interval of the simulation model. In this calculation, the grid interval is equal. But because the temperature difference at earlier time of the temperature profile becomes larger, the grid interval near the temperature sensing point is needed to be narrower. Also, to determine whether the temperature difference at early time is significant or not, the uncertainty of each temperature profile is required to estimate. References: [1] M. G. Langseth et al. (1976) Proc. Lunar Sci. Conf., 7, 3143-3171. [2] S. Tanaka et al. (1999) Adv. Space Res., 23, 1825-1828. [3] E. S. Hütter and N. I. Kömle (2012) Geosci. Instrum. Method. Data Syst., 1, 53-75. [4] N. I. Kömle et al. (2013) Geosci. Instrum. Method. Data Syst., 2, 151-156. [5] T. Chan et al. (1978) Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. [6] H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jaeger (1959) Oxford Univ. Press. Fig.3 Temperature profiles of the theoretical solution of the needle probe method and the experimental data Fig.4 Temperature profiles of the heat-transfer simulation and the sensitivity analysis, and the experimental data Theory Experiment Experiment Simulation 6000 6000 2856.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
