2860.PDF
MINERALOGICAL AND SPECTRAL HETEROGENEITY OF CHELYABINSK METEORITE.    T. Arai1, S. Abe2, K. Ohtsuka3, T. Hiroi4, M. Komatsu5, T. Fagan5, Planetary Exploration Research Center (PERC), Chiba Institute of Technology, 2-17-1 Tsudanuma, Narashino, Chiba 275-0016, Japan (tomoko.arai@it-chiba.ac.jp), 2Dept. of Aerospace Engineering, College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, 7-24-1 Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8501, Japan, 3Tokyo Meteor Network, 1-27-5 Daisawa, Tokyo 155-0032, Japan, 4Department of Geological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA, 5Department of Earth Sciences, Waseda University, Tokyo 169-8050, Japan.  Introduction: Meteorites are important sources of information on composition and age of the solar system materials. However, collected meteorites are likely biased and unrepresentative of the near-Earth meteoroid population. Mineralogy and reflectance spectra of meteorites are used to link specific classes of meteorites and asteroids, but are not definitive enough. Meteorites of which fall were witnessed are rare and substantial case when meteorites and their parent bodies are directly linked, and both orbital and material data of the near-Earth bodies are known. The fireball was eye-witnessed near Chelyabinsk city of Russia in 15 February 2013,  and associated meteorites of total mass of 4-6 ton, were subsequently recovered [1]. Survey of physical and chemical nature of small bodies with an Earth-crossing orbit is crucial in understanding the origin and evolution of the nearEarth materials and in planetary defense. While nearEarth objects (NEO) > 1 km dia. have been largely identified by NEO survey programs, most NEOs < 100 m dia. remain unknown . Thus, it is important to study the Chelyabinsk-sized objects. Here, we present mineralogy and reflectance spectra of the Chelyabinsk meteorites. Samples and Methods: Two chip samples were used for mineralogical and spectral analyses (Fig. 1). Electron beam analyses were perfomed on the polished thin sections and thick sections (Figs. b, c) with JEOL JSM-6510 LA analytical SEM at PERC, Chiba Inst. of Technology (ChiTech) and JEOL JXA-8900 EPMA at Department of Earth Sciences, Waseda University. Reflectance spectra were measured on an exposed surface (Fig. 1a) of the chip by Spectral Reflectance Imager (SRIM) at PERC, ChiTech [2], which includes Ocean Optics USB 2000+ visible spectrometer, Ocean Optics NIRQuest 512 Near Infrared spectrometer, and Ocean Optics R200 splitter optical fiber (core diameter 200 µm), and tungsten halogen light source.  Results:  The two sample studied are both covered by black shiny fusion crust, but the interioir looks quite  different: one is light colored (sample A) (Fig 1a, b) and another is dark (sample B) (Fig. 1c). The exposed surface of the sample A interior (Fig. 1a) is a complex breccias with a dark glassy portion (upper area of Fig. 1a), a white crystalline portion (lower area of the Fig. 1a), and grey area in between. After a few mm slice was cut from that surface, the interior looks distinct, and the entire surface consists of white crustalline portion with visible chondrules (Fig. 1b). It is a coherent chondrites, including abundant chondrules of a few hundred micron to 2 mm in diameter. Some chondrules show a clear boundary with a surrounding matrix, but most have equilibrated with a matrix, having surrounded coarsed-grained olivine and orthopyroxene. Olivine (Fa27-29), orthopyroxene (Fs23-24), diopside, albitic plagioclase (Ab86-90), phosphate, FeNi metal, troilite, and kamacite are present.  Within a few cm of the surface, the sample B is mineralogically heterogeneous with a complex mixture of fine-grained glassy materials, degraded chondrules and coarse-grained olivine crystals (Fig. 2). A large subrounded elongated olivine (Fa28-29) of 3 mm across is found within the glassy matrix (Fig. 2a). Olivine fragments of variable size (a few tens micron to a few mm across) are all subrounded, suggesting partial melting. The chondrule size is greater than that of the samples A, and ranges from 1 to 2 mm across (Fig. 2c). Most chondrules are equilibrated with the matrix (Fig. 2c). Olivine composition (Fa27-30) in chondrules is similar to that in the glassy matrix. In contrast,  albitic plagioclase in chondrules (Ab84-90) and in glassy matrix (Ab70-72) is in stark contrast. Orthopyroxene 2860.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
(Fs22-25), diopside, phosphate, FeNi metal, troilite, and kamacite are also present. The glassy portion is rich in sodium with a variable Na2O content (1-4 wt%). The fusion crust shows a relatively homogeneous composition with 1.5 wt% Na2O in average. Reflectance spectra measured on the light and dark portion show remarkable difference in surface reflectance (Fig. 3). Olivine absorption centered around 1.05 micron is prominent in the white portion, while the dark portion show relatively flat feature without olivine absorption.  Discussion:  The mineralogy and reflectance spectra is consistent with the previous study [1, 2]. The occurrence of the light and dark materials within a cm-sized single sample and in cm-sized different samples shows that the Chelyabinsk meteorites consist of a mixture of the light and dark lithology in the cm scale. The texture and the inhomogeneous mineralogy of the dark glassy lithology in the sample B indicates an origin of impact melt. Similar mineral compositions of the chondrules in the sample A and sample B imply that the precursor of the dark lithology should be the light lithology. The larger chondrule size in the dark lithology than in the light lithology suggests a possible size sorting of chondrules during impact melting. The Na-rich composition of the impact melt in the dark lithology, which is one order of magnitude higher than the Na2O content (0.2-0.6wt%) of the chondrites compositioin indicate impact melting caused a partial melting where albitic plagioclase with lower melting temperature was selectively melted. The contrast in surface reflectance and the presence/absence of olivine absorption between the two lithologies implies a possible heterogeneity in spectral reflectance of the surface of the Chelyabinsk  parent body. References: [1] Popova O.P et al. (2013) Science 342, 1069. [2] Nazarov M. A. et al. (2013) Meteoritical Bulletin.  Fig. 3 Visible-near infrared reflectance spectra of the Chelyabinsk sample of Fig. 1a. 2860.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
