 TITAN L. Ochoa1, nal de lhochoag@u  Introd of Nationa academic lombia. F started this topics. The to work in ers and stu ported by t tion of this all academ physical an Fig 1. Par a fragment Confor group com themes app ly in plane geomorpho According demic com and direct Sciences. from the enthusiasts these scien group also research in Makin bia is a co issues, so t Planetary S - PLANETA , J. Sanchez2,  Colombia, unal.edu.co, jjsa uction.  TITA al University o group on Plan rom the Dep s initiative to e strong interes planetary topi udents a work the university s group has ex mic population nd geochemica rt of Planetary t meteorite foun rmation. Amo mbines extensi plied to differe etary volcanism ology and ch as  the group mmunity, more t their academ The creation o need to conn s of these issu nces from cou o aims to be n Colombia. ng Planetary S ountry that ha the work to do Science is the f ARY SCIEN D. Tovar3 L. L Carrera ancheza@unal.ed AN - Planetary of Colombia ( netary Science partment of G begin serious st within the ac ics caused that king group an was created. S xisted a partner interested in g al phenomena o Science Group nd in Colombia ong several m ive experience ent Solar Syste m, satellite im haracterization p was known i people are int mic activity to of this academ ect researcher ues to begin s untry's largest a starting poin Science in Col as no experien o is huge. Crea first step, whic NCE GROU Lozano4, F. Sa 45 No du.co, dftovarr@ y Science Grou UN) is the fir e created in C Geology at U s work on the cademic campu t between teach nd research sup Since the form rship working geological, ge of Solar System up members wi a. members of th e in geologic m bodies, main mage processin of meteorite in the local ac terested to wor o the Planetar mic group aro rs, students an serious work o university. Th nt for planetar lombia. Colom nce in planetar ating a group ch we have don UP - NATI aavedra5; 1,2,3,4,5 26-85 Edi @unal.edu.co, lal up rst oUN se us hpmaof om.  ith he cal nng, es. cark ry se nd on he ry mry of ne succes and pr right n we rel ESA), proces review compi workin B.S activity realiza more s not on careers Univer finishi fology Fig 2. colomb Ed netary month interes Sci divulg audien the gen ties of Co UN is academ brings ers in tion of ONAL UNI 5Department of ificio 224, lozanog@unal.ed ssfully. Later o roduce quality now. To gener ly on authorita which we ssing and anal w of scientific le current know ng, for each ca Sc and M.Sc th y of TITAN ation of  degree students to do nly from the G s in science rsity of Colom ing on volcani y, geochemistry Part of Plane bian planetary ducational Imp Science in th hs of existence st in the scienti ientific Divulg gation activitie nces. In 2014, neral public as f the  group.  onclusions. TI the first grou mic and resear together resea the country in f Planetary Sci IVERSITY O f Geosciences, Bogotá du.co, fsaavedra on, start doing y material, wh rate this quality ative sources e download d lyzing. We als c articles prev wledge on the se. hesis. A very i -  Planetary S e works planet their degree w Geology departm and engineeri mbia. Right now sm, cryovolca y and asteroid i etary Science G y scientist Adria pact. Being th he country, the e has been gre ific community gation. TITAN es directed p we will begin s part of the pu ITAN - Plane up in Colombia rch work on p archers, studen a single path ence in Colom OF COLOM , Universidad N D.C., Colo ada@unal.edu.co g scientific re hich is our a y scientific ma (mainly NASA data to subse so make an ar viously publish specific topic important part cience Group tary topics and work on these i ment but from ing in the Na w several articl anism, mars ge impacts. Group member ana Ocampo, P he first group o e impact on it eat, generating y in Colombia. N conducts sci rimarily to c a series of tal ublic outreach tary Science a that has star planetary topic nts and science that leads to re mbia. MBIA. Nacioombia,  o. search ctivity aterial, A and equent rduous hed to that is of the is the invite issues, m other ational les are eomor rs with PhD. of Plats few g great entific college lks for activiGroup rted an cs and e writealiza