2882.PDF
Crater Size-Frequency Distributions on the Ejecta of Giordano BrunoJ.-P. Williams1, D. A. Paige1, J. B. Plescia2, A. V. Pathare3, and M. S. Robinson4, 1Earth, Planetary, and SpaceSciences, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA (jpierre@mars.ucla.edu), 2Johns HopkinsUniversity, Applied Physics Lab, Laurel MD 20723, 3Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA, 4Schoolof Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ 85287.Introduction: Radiometric and cosmic-ray exposure ages of Apollo and Luna samples, correlatedwith crater populations, anchor the lunar craterchronology and enable systems of crater retentionage isochrons to be developed (e.g. [1]). Isochronsrepresent the predicted SFD of a crater population for a given surface age. The youngest agesof the lunar chronology (< 1 Ga) are tied tocrater counts conducted on the continuous ejecta ofcraters where Apollo samples have provided exposure ages. Crater counts conducted on the ejectaof Giordana Bruno (GB), a young 22 km diametercrater on the lunar far side, exhibit significant discrepancies initially reported by [2]. Since the latterhalf of the lunar chronology rests entirely on cratercounts conducted on the ejecta of larger craters, wetake a closer look at the discrepancies observed inthe crater SFDs on the ejecta of GB.Rock abundance: Images from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) and data fromthe Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment revealthe heterogeneous nature of the ejecta of GB (Fig1). Rock abundance (RA) derived from Diviner [3]shows significant variability with values exceeding 30% in places, some of the highest values observed on the Moon. The highest RA values correspond to area comprised of large blocks of material.These regions appear nearly devoid of craters (Fig1b). The SFD of craters in areas of high RA versuslow RA (Fig 1c) show that craters with diameterssmaller than the blocks are absent implying impactenergy from these smaller events goes into breakingdown the blocks without generating craters. Largercrater diameters however exhibit a similar SFD.Impact Melt: Impact melt deposits with freshmorphologies are also observed on the ejecta (Fig2). RA of the melt deposit is∼ 9− 10% implying, inspite of its fresh appearance, it has already accumulated a layer of fine material. However, the ejectaof a ∼ 30 m diameter crater on the melt deposit iscomprised of blocks of material indicating the deposit remains a competent rock layer. Crater countsconducted on the melt deposit and the adjacent underlying ejecta produce different crater SFDs.Surface ages: We model the ages of the craterSFDs by scaling the observed terrestrial fireballpopulation to the Moon, an approach detailed inFigure 1: (a) Diviner RA overlaying LROC NACmosaic. (b) RA overlaying LROC NAC with cratersoutlined in white. (c) Cumulative crater frequencyof high RA (> 15%) and low RA (< 5%) areas.[4]. Crater isochron models are generated for different target properties [5]. We compare the modelisochrons to counts conducted on the ejecta ofNorth Ray crater and Cone crater, two craters usedto anchor the lunar chronology with exposure agesof 50.3± 0.8 Ma and 25.1± 1.2 Ma, respectively [6].Assuming nominal regolith properties we obtainsimilar ages to the exposure ages. The isochronshowever yield ages that differ by a factor ∼ 10 between the melt deposit and the adjacent underlying ejecta at GB even though these deposits formednear-contemporaneously. If we assume a hard rocktarget for the melt deposit, then this discrepancy isreduced indicating the crater diameters scale differently on the melt deposit (Fig 3). Additionally,2882.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
Figure 2: (a) Impact melt deposit on the ejectaof GB. White box is location of (b) a 30 m craterexcavating coherent blocks. (c) Ring structure inmelt deposit and (d) adjacent craters with melt deposited in floors.craters appear to have been formed on the ejectaprior to the emplacement of the melt deposit implying self-secondary craters [7] may have populatedthe ejecta of GB. A ring structure in the melt depositis observed that is interpreted to be a buried craterand craters near the melt deposit contact appearto have smooth, flat floors that may be deposits ofmelt indicating the surface had preexisting craters.Discussion: This raises the question then ofwhether crater populations on the ejecta of largercraters are reliable for anchoring the lunar chronology. We do obtain ages consistent with exposureages for North Ray and Cone craters. This couldimply that the ejecta of craters are homogenized ontimes scales of tens of Myrs. Alternatively, NorthRay and Cone craters are much smaller, 1 km and340 m diameter respectively, and were lower energy events. They may not have be as prone tosecondary cratering and the ejecta may not havestarted as heterogeneously as GB.References[1] G. Neukum, et al. Cratering Records in the Inner Solar System in Relation to the Lunar Reference System.Figure 3: (a) Crater SFD of ejecta and melt deposit on GB fit with lunar regolith and hard rockisochrons. (b) SFD of craters on ejecta of North Rayand Cone craters.Space Science Reviews, 96:55–86, 2001.[2] J. B. Plescia, et al. Giordano Bruno: The young andthe restless. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf., XXXXI, 2010.[3] J. L. Bandfield, et al. Lunar surface rock abundanceand regolith fines temperatures derived from LRODiviner Radiometer data. J. Geophys. Res., 116, 2011.doi:10.1029/2011JE003866.[4] J.-P. Williams, et al. The production of small primarycraters on Mars and the Moon. Icarus, submitted,2014.[5] K. A. Holsapple. The scaling of impact processes inplanetary science. Ann. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 21:333–373, 1993.[6] D. Sto¨ffler and G. Ryder. Stratigraphy and isotopeages of lunar geologic units: chronology standard forthe inner solar system. Planet. Space. Sci., 96:9–54,2001.[7] E. M. Shoemaker, et al. Television observations fromSurveyor 7. JPL Tech. Rep., 32-1264:9–75, 1968.2882.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
	Introduction:	Rock abundance:	Impact Melt:	Surface ages:	Discussion: