 MULTIPLE, HIERARCHICAL HEATING OF CHONDRULES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR COOLING RATES. John T. Wasson, Bastian Baecker and Alan E. Rubin Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics,.Departments of Earth and Space Sciences and Chemistry and Biochemistry University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA  Introduction. Because of geometry, all nebular chondrule heating mechanisms provide a wide range of heat fluxes to chondrule precursors and preexisting chondrules. The most intense heating events provide high degrees of melting (at about 1900 K) but these are the most rare.  With decreasing temperatures the number of heating events experienced by a chondrule increases exponentially. This makes laboratory simulation of chondrule formation very difficult. We should, nonetheless, not succumb to the temptation to compare the detailed textures of chondrules with textures produced in a single laboratory heating event.  Chondrule petrography. Most chondrules in primitive, unmetamorphosed chondrites are porphyritic with widely varying compositions. Crystals of olivine and pyroxene are set in a glassy mesostasis  having modal compositions dominated by plagioclase but also containing moderate fractions of the mafic minerals.   If a chondrule is heated to high temperatures (>1750 K) leading to melt fractions >0.7 the original chondrule can no longer be recognized although some phenocrysts may survive as relict grains. In contrast, in a chondrule heated to temperatures only slightly higher than the solidus (~1450 K), only the mesostatis is melted and the shape of the chondrule is preserved. If the modal fraction of mafic minerals in the mesostasis was relatively high, cooling will produce overgrowth layers on preexisiting phenocrysts. Because mixing in the mesostasis melt will partially remove gradients in the Fe/Mg ratio produced during the growth of the previous layer, solidification of successive melts will produce a series of zoned overgrowth layers .  If the gradients in these overgrowths are not erased by later thermal diffusion, these profiles can be used to assess the number of reheating events the chondrules experienced in the solar nebula. Chondrule heating events. There are many problems with forming common (metal and relict-grain bearing, porphyritic) chondrules by breaking up molten planetesimals and we will not consider such models.   Melt formation resulting from impacts on lowporosity asteroids is inefficient; impacts on porous bodies are relatively efficient at forming melts, but the melts are formed well below the surface. Thus the process cannot produce chondrules, which have spherical shapes determined by surface tension.   For these reasons we only consider chondrule formation by flash melting in the relatively transparent solar nebula.  The commonly cited metchanisms are lightning [1] and planetesimal bow shocks [2]. Some other proposed nebular models (e.g., nebula-wide shocks, magnetic recombination) have not yet been examined in detail.   Melting events recorded in pyroxene phenocrysts.. We searched one LL3.0 Semarkona thin section (AMNH 4128-2) for pyroxene phenocrysts which preserve multiple zoned layers ("rhythmic zoning").  We found about 8; Fig. 1 shows  a dramatic example. Igneous zoning is preserved in a series of layers; nine are numbered on the image.   The linear size of the phenocryst increased by a factor of two (and the volume by a factor of 8) as a result of these overgrowth layers. Our picture is that each of these layers reflects small but variable heat pulses that melted and mixed mesostasis. When crystallization of each layer stopped because of falling temperatures, the adjacent melt was enriched in Fe.  The next small melting event both raised the temperature and partially mixed the mesostasis. This was followed by igneous crystallization that initially produced Mg-rich pyroxene; as the adjacent melt became more Fe-rich, the FeO/(MgO ratio in the pyroxene increased.   Fig. 1. BSE image of a low-Ca pyroxene grain in chondrule E4 in Semarkona section AMNH 4128-2 shows a series of igneously zoned layers.  We numbered  9 recognizable bright layers.  White phases are olivine.  Absence of rhythmic layering in olivine. The olivine grains in the same chondrules show little evidence of layering.  Some show overgrowths on low-FeO relict  grains, but clear evidence of repeated layering has not been found. We suggest that this mainly reflects the much lower diffusion rate for cations in pyroxene compared to olivine; diffusive mixing in olivine during subsequent heat pulses leveled our the zoning in the olivine overgrowths.  A minor effect is that olivine is the more refractory phase, the fraction of modal olivine in mesostasis may be less than the fraction of pyroxene.  Hierarchical nature of nebular heating events. For geometrical reasons all flash melting events produce a range of temperatures in the chondrules and chondrule precursors in the adjacent region.  Consider chondrule heating by radiation from a lightning bolt.  Because the plasma part of a lightning bolt is much too hot to allow survival of a millimeter-size chondrule we conclude that chondrules would be heated by radiation. The StefanBoltzmann relationship shows that the radiation flux required to heat a chondrule to 1900 K is 3 that required to heat it to 1450 K.  Lightning bolts heat cylindrical regions, thus the flux scales linearly with the radial distance from the bolt but the volume of rings of solids (e.g., having a radius range of R0.05R) around the bolt scales as the square of the radius.  Thus there should be nine times as much material heated to 1450 K as there is heated to 1900 K.  Heating by radiation is complicated. Heat is initially absorbed by opaque components with the heat then transported by conduction to the other components [3]. During the formation of the chondrule from a porous assemblage it seems was important to form a melt that would wet the surfaces of unmelted grains and thus incorporate them into a melt which then collapsed to became spheroidal because of surface tension effects. Because grain interiors are heated during a short heat pulse by (the slow transport process of) conduction, it was probably necessary to heat grain surfaces to >2000 K in order to produce an initial melt fraction that could facilitate this collapse process.   After formation of chondrules radiation would be absorbed by opaque minerals and by FeO-rich mesostasis. Above we estimated that the radiation fluence required to melt chondrules was 3 larger than that needed to melt mesostasis.  These arguments suggest that the factor was larger and thus that the fraction of chondrules experiencing mesostasis remelting was probably >9 the fraction of new chondrules produced by extensive melting. The implied heating scenario. We thus propose that the textures of chondrules record one large melting event followed by many (probably >10) events that only melted mesostasis.  If at some point another large melting event occurred, the clock was restarted.  However, these resetting events were probably rare. We know from concentric compound chondrules that the melting process that produced the secondary chondrule caused almost no melting of the mafic minerals of the primary chondrule. It thus appears that melting of mafic materials was largely confined to particles small enough be melted by heat conduction.  Thus our standard picture should be that each chondrule experienced initial formation as a high-degree (>50%) melt followed by ten or more events that remelted mesostasis and produced extensive growth of mafic phenocrysts. Implications for chondrule cooling rates. Chondrule cooling rates are largely based on furnace-type laboratory simulations.  The goal of these experiments has been to simulate the textures of chondrules in a single cooling event.   Pyroxene phenocrysts in LL3.0 Semarkona record a large number (9) of additional melting events with the grain growing in volume by a factor of ~8. Correction of this additional grain growth would increase cooling rate estimates by at least an order of magnitude. Summary. There is much evidence that the mafic phenocrysts in chondrules were not mainly formed in a single melting event, but that they continued to grow in a series of later events that melted plagioclase-rich mesostasis but left preexisting mafic phenocrysts at essentially their preexisting sizes and geometric locations.  Our observations show clear evidence that a low-Ca pyroxene phenocryst increased in volume by a factor of ~8 as a result of 9 or more subsequent melting events.  Because of its much lower cation diffusion coefficients, the record is preserved much better in pyroxene than in olivine. Those interested in modeling chondrule formation must recognize that Nature frequently acts in messy ways. Neglecting the effects of these additional heating events leads to a gross underestimation of chondrule cooling rates and, if these are used to constrain models, the inferred scenarios should be met with skepticism.   However appealing the simplicity of cooling rates based on furnace experiments, the use of systematically low cooling rates to constrain chondrule formation models can only delay the development of a viable model. References: [1] Whipple F. (1972) From Plasma to Planets, 211. [2] Hood. L. L. et al. ASP Conf. Ser. 341, 873. [3] Eisenhour D. et al. (1994) Science 265, 1067.    