2885.PDF
CONTROLLED LROC NARROW ANGLE CAMERA HIGH RESOLUTION MOSAICS. S. M. Klem1, M. R. Henriksen1,  J.  Stopar1,  A.  Boyd,  M. S.  Robinson1,  and  the  LROC Science  Team1, 1School  of  Earth  and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85251, USA. (sklem@ser.asu.edu)Introduction: Controlled  mosaics  from  Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) Narrow Angle Camera  (NAC)  [1]  image  sequences  provide  an accurate cartographic framework for a host of scientific and  engineering  studies.  Mosaics  are  composed  of overlapping images acquired over time or from sets of images  targeted  across  sequential  orbits.  NAC image pairs  are  first  tied  to  an  existing  controlled  map product: either a NAC Digital Terrain Model (DTM) [2] or an existing controlled mosaic of the area.  If there is neither a DTM nor a controlled mosaic available for the area, a different pair of NAC images that have Lunar Orbiter  Laser  Altimeter  (LOLA)  cross-over  smithed Spacecraft  Position Kernels (SPKs) [3] are used. The images are map projected on a pixel-by-pixel basis to the  WAC GLD100  [4]  for  a  shape  model.  After  the NAC images for the new controlled mosaic are tied to the  best  existing  ground  control,  they  are  mosaicked together. Figure 1: Larmor Q low-Sun controlled NAC mosaic (B) 1.3 m/pix constructed from three NAC pairs, total width is ~57 km, north is up.While it is possible to make geometrically seamless mosaics  using images acquired at  different  times and with  different  pixel  scales,  there  are  inevitably  small photometric  differences  that  lead  to  noticeable reflectance  boundaries.  Mosaics  from  NAC  images acquired during non-sequential orbits have a range of incidence  angles,  resolution  and  sometimes,  opposite Sun  azimuths.  These  mosaics  can  also  be  more challenging to control. Many of the controlled mosaics are made from image sets specifically targeted (termed "Featured Mosaics" or FMs) across sequential orbits so that the lighting conditions and pixel scales are nearly invariant.  Often  the  images  that  make  up  FMs  are acquired nadir looking in the center, and slewed (from 3°  to  30°  degrees)  moving  outward.  The  number  of NAC pairs  in  FMs acquired  to  date  range from two NAC  pairs  to  37  NAC  pairs.  The  largest  controlled mosaic  completed  thus  far  completed  has  24  NAC pairs.Radiometric, geometric, and photometric processing are  done  with  the  USGS  Integrated  Software  for Imagers and Spectrometers (ISIS) [5]. The raw images (Experimental  Data  Records  or  "EDRs")  are  first radiometrically calibrated to radiance factor (or I/F) and pointing and position information is added to the labels using  the  NAIF  SPICE  system  [6].  The  image footprints  are  then  viewed  using  the  ISIS  command qmos to  check  and  make  sure  all  the  images  of  the controlled  mosaic  overlap.  If  they  do not  all  overlap into  a  single  image  group,  then  the  multiple  image groups are each made into their own controlled mosaic. The  overlapping  images  are  seeded  with  points  and registered using ISIS commands autoseed and pointreg, respectively.  Pointreg generates  the  point  registration file.  Then,  ten ground control  points  are added in an ISIS program,  qnet.  Ground control  points are points that  tie  the images for a mosaic to a ground control, either a DTM, an existing controlled mosaic or a NAC pair  with  LOLA  SPKs  projected  onto  the  WAC GLD100 global shape model (100 meter pixel  scale). After  which,  the  images  for  the  mosaic  are  bundle adjusted using the ISIS command jigsaw. The output of jigsaw is the bundle output which is used in the next steps.  The parameters used for the bundle adjustment are:  observation=no,  which  allows  each  image  to  be treated as a separate observation instead of all of them being treated as one;  method=sparse, which solves for a matrix with speed and little memory usage; twist=no, which prevents a twist angle being added to the bundle output;  outlier_rejection=yes, which allows outliers to be  found  and  rejected;  camsolve=all,  so  that  the coefficients for angles, velocities, and acceleration are solved for the camera angles and is more accurate with all coefficients solved for;  spsolve=position, solves for the  position  of  the  spacecraft;  the spacecraft_position_sigma is given the value, 300; and both  the  camera_angles_sigma and 2885.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
camera_angular_velocity_sigma are  given the values of 0.1. If the jigsaw bundle output is good, determined by the Sigma0 value given in the bundle output (which ideally would be around  1.0) then the images are map projected  and mosaicked together. Geometric  Seam Checking:  Once  the  images  are mosaicked  together,  the  seams  (where  two  different NAC pairs overlap) are checked at full scale to ensure proper image alignment. Most mosaics have slight seam errors; if they are  off by less than 7 or 8 pixels (usually due to uncorrected topography), the mosaic is declared completed. If there are areas where the seam is off by more than 7 or 8 pixels,  additional  tie  points will  be added to the unprojected images to help improve image alignment.  In  some  cases  seams  are  mismatched  by more than 20 pixels. For these cases the unsatisfactory pointreg fit is re-run with a larger matching search chip, or edits to the point registration file are made. When editing  the  registration  file,  points  with  high  RMS values from the jigsaw bundle output are removed and new points are added to fill in along the seam to force the images to line up. This process is repeated and until the seams are less than 8 pixels off.Figure 2: Left image shows an uncontrolled mosaic seam, right image shows the controlled mosaic seam.Once  the  geometric  seams  are  finalized,  the unprojected images are photometrically corrected (ISIS photomet),  projected,  and  mosaicked.  Occasionally, photomet does  not  correct  or  completely  remove radiometric  offsets,  in  which  case  a  histogram normalization is performed by interactively displaying the  overlapping  photometrically  corrected radiometrically  calibrated  images  with  SPICE information. Using the histogram tool, a box is drawn on  regions  of  overlap  with  the  greatest  radiometric mismatches. One NAC pair is chosen as the base pair to match all the images in the mosaic. Each NAC pair is normalized to the base pair working outward from the base pair. For images that do not overlap the base pair the closest normalized image is used.Error  Analysis:  The  most  common  causes  of geometric errors between NAC pairs are large changes in  topography  unresolved  in  the  GLD100,  and  auto registration  errors  caused  by  large  differences  in lighting conditions amongst NAC pairs. When one or both of these conditions occur,  pointreg has a difficult time matching  points  in  the overlapping  areas  of  the images The bundle output can also have a difficult time registering and matching the points. The jigsaw bundle adjustment output provides RMS values for each point, allowing  identification  of  the  largests  area  of  seam offset.Accuracy: Mosaics  are  controlled  to  two different types of ground truth:  DTM or a NAC image/pair of NAC images with the necessary LOLA SPKs. Camera orientation can be further refined if the images contain equipment from a US or Soviet lunar mission for which accurate coordinates are known, the camera orientation is updated with these accurate ground truth points (ISIS deltack).Scientific  Application: The  high  resolution  and accurate ground representation afforded by controlled NAC mosaics  facilitate  photogeologic  interpretations. The  seamless  coverage  and  consistent  lighting conditions  of  FMs  over  a  large  ground  area  makes controlled NAC mosaics  an excellent  data source for the  construction  of  geologic  maps.  The  applied  map projection  and  precise  geodetic  control  allow morphometric and geographic determinations to within ± 15 meters and aid in the interpretation of geologic units  and  contacts,  as  well  as  the  location  and environment  of  spacecraft   componetnts  left  on  the lunar surface (Apollo, Luna, Chang'e) . Currently there are 43 LROC NAC controlled mosaics are available on the LROC PDS archive webpage: http://wms.lroc.asu.edu/lroc/rdr_product_select  References: 1] Robinson, M.S. et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev.  150(1), 81-124. [2] Burns, K.N. et al.  (2012) LSPRS XXII, 483-488. [3] Smith, D.E. et al. (2010) Geophys. Res. Letters, 37(18), L18204. [4] Scholten, F. et al. (2012) J. of Geophys.  Res.  117, E00H17.  [5]  Anderson,  J.A.  et  al.  (2004)  LPSC XXXV, Abstract #2039.  [6] Acton, C.H. Jr. (1996) Planetary  and Space Sci. Vol. 44 Iss. 1 65-70. 2885.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
