 MARSFEST: AN ANNUAL PLANETARY ANALOG EVENT HOSTED BY DEATH VALLEY NATIONAL PARK. Bonaccorsi1,2,3, A. J. P. Jones4,5, R., T. Baldino3, A. Thickpenny3, L. V. Bleacher5, C. P. McKay 1NASA Ames Research Center (M.S. 245-3, Moffett Field CA 94035; rosalba.bonaccorsi-1@nasa.gov), 2SETI Institute - Carl Sagan Center for the Study of Life in the Universe (189 Bernardo Ave, Suite 100, Mountain View CA 94043), 3Death Valley National Park (Death Valley, CA 92328), 4Lunar and Planetary Institute (3600 Bay Area Blvd., Houston TX 77058), 5NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (8800 Greenbelt Road, Greenbelt MD 20771).   Introduction:  One of NASA's key programs is the exploration of Mars. Work in deserts on Earth as analogs for Mars is important for Mars missions and interpreting mission results. This work has been ongoing by planetary scientists since the late 1980's to better understand morphologies and environments observed or expected on planetary bodies of our Solar System [e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4 ]. The SETI Institute, NASA Goddard, NASA Ames, JPL and the National Park Service were excited to collaborate again in 2013 to bring scientists, the public and National Park enthusiasts together to explore the fascinating research being done in this field. Death Valley National Park boasts several planetary analog research sites within its boundaries and has been excited to share this little known, but extremely important, use of our public lands.  We organized a series of public events in Death Valley.  The first of these was the Mars and the Mojave Festival: Exploring extremes on the Earth and beyond, a three-day event held in March 9-11, 2012 [5, 6].  The event was so successful and well received by the participating scientists, the Park Rangers and the general public that it was repeated in March 1-3, 2013 and has the support to become an annual event.  The talks showcased the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Mars Curiosity Rover planning in 2012 and preliminary results in 2013. Several Curiosity scientists and engineers from NASA Ames and Goddard were involved and made presentations including Chris McKay and Aaron Zent (2012-2013), Bob Haberle (2013) and Florence Tan (2013).  Additional speakers came from the SETI Institute (M. Race), JPL, the Desert Research Instutute, and various universities [6]. The goal of this event has been to elevate public awareness about planetary analog research taking place on Earth, and its associated missions in space. Festival Description: The MarsFest 2013 planetary science festival was intended for visitors of all ages and interest levels. It featured lectures on topics such as planetary climate change and societal implications of analog research, as well as scientist-led field trips to analog sites (Mars Hill, Badwater Basin, Ubehebe Volcanic Field, and Mesquite Sand Dunes). The 2013 event included several talks in concurrent seessions and multiple field trips at the same sites, to help ensure that visitors did not miss these opportunities due to scheduling conflicts or over-capacity.    Figure 1. Advertising flier for the 2013 MarsFest  For the novice space explorers introductory talks about planetary science and exploration and ranger talks/guided hikes were added to the 2013 festival.  An Expo with information booths included demonstrations specially crafted for kids. The Expo booths were hosted by representatives from NASA, non-profits, and universities - and included a mini-Curiosity rover from JPL's Mars Public Engagement Team, the Mars Society's mini-rover, and CheMin Terra demonstrations. The festival culminated in a "Curiosity Hour" featuring scientists participating in the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover mission, and a panel discussion on the future of planetary exploration on society (on Earth and beyond) [6].  The festival opened with a keynote address by Chris McKay (NASA Ames) highlighting the exploits and discoveries of the MSL Curiosity rover [7]. To celebrate Death Valley as a newly designated International Dark Sky Park, an evening planet-viewing event was hosted by Park Rangers and an Americorps group.  Death Valley is committed to the education and interpretation of the resources that surround our planet and are so visible from our park.   Figure 2. Field trip to Badwater: Susanne Douglas (left) sharing her research about possible Martian microbial analogs with festival participants.  Susanne Douglas (PSI / Caltech / USC) led 2 field trips to Badwater to share with visitors her research on microbes living in the evaporite deposits. If life forms exist or once existed in evaporite environments on Mars, they may be similar to these mineral-dwelling microbial communities. Aaron Zent (NASA Ames) led visitors to Mars Hill and the Mesquite Sandunes. The former location is geomorphically and geologically similar to the Viking 1 and Pathfinder landing sites and was used as a testbed for mission engineers.    Figure 3. Field trip to Ubehebe Crater bottom, a natural laboratory environment and proposed analog test site for claystone deposits investigated by Curiosity.  Rosalba Bonaccorsi (SETI Institute/NASA Ames) and Bob Haberle took visitors on a hike through the Ubehebe Volcanic Field, where Rosalba studies the geology, the hydro climatic features, as well as the astrobiological implications of an environment that may be similar to dry, hot deserts on a younger Mars. Collaboration:  The analog festival is a collaborative effort between NASA, the National Park Service, and the SETI Institute. Key components are the NASA's MSL Curiosity rover mission team, represented by the Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) [8] Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) Team, and the SETI Institute. Support for the festival comes from several scientists, E/PO professionals, astronomy club members, and other planetary science enthusiasts (e.g., The Mars Society and the Planetary Society), who volunteer to share their time, information, resources, and excitement with visitors. Over 40 volunteers from the Bay Area and Southern California were involved to operate booths and public events.  In addition to senior scientits many students and junior scientists were involved. We had such enthusiastic support from Death Valley National Park that the speakers and volunteers felt an amazing sense of community and shared interest. Future MarsFest events in Death Valley:  This year the activities drew in over 1,000 visitors over the 3-day event. Due to budgetary constraints to the Park and NASA a reduced event including one-day speaker series has being organized for March 2014. It is hoped budget and staffing will allow for a full MarsFest event in 2015 and include activities similar to those held in 2012 and 2013. Slight modifications to some activities and introduction of new events will be explored based on lessons learned from the first two years as well as feedback from volunteers and visitors. Relevance of Death Valley work:  Research activities in Death Valley and close working relationship with the Park are an important component of the Mars program. Events such MarsFest enhance the park's understanding of the NASA research and fosters future cooperative efforts. This public outreach activity is an important part of communicating to the public what NASA missions are doing and showing the connection to life on Earth.  The Death Valley National Park MarsFest events can be a model for other parks and public lands with planetary analog sites.  References: [1] Baldridge A. M., Farmer J. D., and Moersch J. E. (2004) JGR, 109, E12006. [2] Bonaccorsi R. (2011) Stromatolites: Interaction of Microbes with Sediments, 18, 705-722. [3] Douglas and Yang (2002) Geology, 30:12, 1075-1078. [4] Nordgren (2010). [5] http://www.nps.gov/deva/parknews. [6] http://www.seti.org/marsfest2013. [7] Grotzinger et al. (2012) Space Sci. Rev., 170, 5-56. [8] Mahaffy et al. (2012) Space Sci. Rev., 170, 401-478. 