2905.PDF
DETECTION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SUB-KM ASTEROID POPULATION IN THE MAIN ASTEROID BELT. Tushar Mittal1, Danny Goldstein2, and Peter Nugent2. 1(Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA; tmittal2@berkeley.edu),  2(Department of Astronomy, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA).Introduction: The  coagulation and fragmentation of small bodies to form planetesimals is an important step in planet  formation. The disruption criterion for collisions among various sized objects and at different velocities directly the size distribution in a collisional cascade [1] and thus impacts the evolution and growth of the larger proto-planets as well as the dust production in proto-planetary disks and debris disks.  The  criterion  for  catastrophic  collisions  in  which the largest surviving fragment has less than half of the target's  mass, is typically represented by the critical kinetic energy of the projectile per unit mass of the target ( QD*). QD* generally decreases with increasing diameter  for  asteroids  less  than 0.1  km (‘strength-scaled∼  regime’) and increases with increasing diameter for the larger asteroids (‘gravity-scaled regime’) with a transition  zone  at  .1-1  km sized  asteroids  [2].  Since  QD* curves have been estimated theoretically and through numerical simulations for target bodies with different composition and internal structure, measurement of the small body population in the Asteroid Main Belt (2.5 - 3.5 AU) can be used to test the model predictions, especially in the QD* transition region. In addition, a high resolution analysis of the size distribution of Main Belt Asteroids (MBAs) can provide useful insight into the collisional and dynamical evolution of MBAs, and the production rate of meteoroids, and near-Earth asteroids and the cratering rates on the surface of inner planets. The size distribution of MBAs down to sub-km size has  been  estimated  by  a  few previous  surveys  with ground-based telescopes such as the Subaru Main Belt Asteroid Survey (SMBAS; [3],[4]), and the Sub-Kilometer Asteroid Diameter Survey ([5]) (See Figure 1). The objective of our study is to use novel analysis techniques  to  push  the  detection  limit  further  (~100  mscale; r magnitude > 24.5 ) in order to better constrain the population of asteroids corresponding to the transition region in QD* and also to characterize the population using statistical models to understand the accretion and collisional evolution of the solar system.Analysis Technique:  Due to PSF broadening and orbital phase lag, objects in our target population appear as extremely faint tracklets in single-exposure images, even with large, ground-based telescopes. Preliminary photometric simulations of few 100m targets using DECam[6] systematics show that tracklets of objects  with  representative  projected  orbital  speeds (20’’/hr. - 40’’/hr) fall below a signal-to-noise ratio of 1.0 in 300s r-band exposures, even under optimal observing conditions.  To  detect  these  faint  objects,  we have developed a specialized pipeline that includes a differencing code, two independent methods for object detection,  and  multiple  routines  for  false  source  removal. Figure 1: The cumulative size distribution of main-belt asteroids. From [4]The pipeline begins with a co-addition routine that creates  deep  reference  images  of  target  fields,  using archival  photometry.  These  reference  images  are aligned with new single-exposure images. A subsequent routine identifies  point  sources  common to  both images, which are then eliminated by a subtraction routine.  Importantly,  this  technique  preserves  the  sky background of input images. The resulting subtracted images are subjected to two independent procedures for object detection. In procedure 1 (“the convolutional  procedure”),  we follow [7] in generating a grid of orbital parameters α, β, and d (where α and β are the orthogonal components of the projected orbital speed, and  d is the distance parameter as defined in [7]), that completely specify the set of asteroid orbits differentiable at the instrumental pixel  scale.  We first  synthesize a  convolution kernel based on the tracklet shape at each grid point, and then convolve it with our input image. Image tracklets that match the kernel  shape are amplified by as much as 10x, while other image patterns due to noise are significantly de-weighed.  Finally,  we run SExtractor[8]  on the convolved image to detect the asteroids. In procedure 2 (“the iterative procedure”), we generate a series of trajectories along which to shift input images using a asteroid motion model based on the grid in procedure 1. For a given input image, we divide each trajectory into steps, then iteratively shift the input image along the trajectory, step-by-step. After each it2905.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
eration, we subtract the input image from itself to form a set of subtraction image layers in memory. Finally, we re-align the layers and co-add them into a single image.  This  process  amplifies  the  signal  of  observed tracklets,  which appear as  distended PSFs detectable by  SExtractor.  Point  sources  are  negated  and  easily identifiable.  When a source is detected by both the procedures,  it  continues  onward  to  false  source  removal. Some sources  that  reach  this  point  may be  variable stars  mistaken  for  asteroids  by  the  assumption  of  a slow orbit and non-perfect reference image subtraction. Accordingly, false source removal begins with the removal  of  known variable  stars,  using a  star  catalog. Next,  we compare  the  multicolor  magnitudes  of  detected  objects  with  non-thermal  asteroid  models, throwing away poor fits. Finally, we perform tracklet detection across intra-night and inter-night images, removing detections that  do  not  reasonably follow extracted orbits across exposures. An important aspect of the complete algorithm is that a single exposure image is used to detect faint tracklets. We also perform additional image stacking using the shifted intra-night images to detect even fainter objects.     Applications:  By combining our method with photometry from large-scale observational surveys, a previously unobserved population of solar system objects can be characterized, both statistically and individually. In  particular,  photometry from existing deep  surveys like the SMBAS as well as other archival imaging surveys of the ecliptic plane by large telescopes can be used for the detection of specific objects. On the other hand, wide-field surveys like the ongoing Dark Energy Survey (5,000 sq. deg.)[9], revisit target fields multiple times  nightly,  exposing  in  multiple  filters  (grizY). These  repeated  exposures  facilitate  intra-night  object tracking, and the color information is useful for false source rejection besides spectral  classification of  detected asteroids. Although DECam dataset probes shallower than Subaru or Keck, its abundant photometric data will substantiate a debiased statistical characterizations of the smaller Main Belt population. Currently, we are  pursuing  each  of  these  applications,  both  as members of the Dark Energy Survey and with public SMBAS data. Since our search algorithm is computationally very intensive, we plan to utilize the supercomputing resources at NERSC for this study.      References: [1] Pan,  M.  & Schlichting,  H.  E. (2012).  ApJ, 747(2), 113. [2] Stewart, S. T. and Leinhardt, Z. M.  ApJL 691.2 (2009): L133. [3] Yoshida, F., and T.  Nakamura.  Planetary and Space Science 55.9 (2007):  1113-1125. [4]  Terai,  T.  et  al.  ApJ 146.5 (2013):  111. [5]  Gladman,  B.  J.,  et  al.  Icarus  202.1 (2009): 104-118. [6] DePoy, D. L., et al. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2008. [7]  Bernstein, G. M.,  et al.  ApJ 128.3 (2004): 1364. [8]  Bertin, E., and S. Arnouts. Astronomy and Astrophysics Supplement Series 117 (1996): 393-404. [9] Collaboration, T. D. E. S. "The dark energy survey." (2005).Figure 2: Preliminary detection efficiency η(r) for moving objects as a function of apparent r magnitude (DES Survey Characteristics) using realistic sky noise. The detection efficiency reduces with motion velocity due to the decrease in flux density. Figure 3: Signal-to-Noise ratio using Subaru and DES exposure time calculators. The Magnitude limit for detection from [3] is shown on the plot. Based on our Preliminary analysis using fake sources, we expect improvements in sensitivity on the order of .5 - 1 magnitude. 2905.pdf
45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2014)
