1013.PDF
The Shortwave ImageR and Spectrometer for Europa (SIRSE).  A. A. Simon1, D. Reuter1, C. Olkin2, S. A. Stern2, J. Emery3, W. Grundy4, R. Hudson1, J. Rathbun5, P. Schenk6 and R. Vervack7. 1NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, 2Southwest Research Institute, 3U. Tennessee, 4Lowell Observatory, 5Planetary Science Institute, 6Lunar and Planetary Institute, 7Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab.   Introduction: The SIRSE instrument provides two payload elements in one, reducing complexity, mass, and power, while providing flexibility in operations and accommodations.  SIRSE will deliver an unparalled scientific dataset of co-registered spectral imaging at 10-nm spectral resolution and panchromatic stereo data.  It is based on extensive instrument heritage, including the New Horizons Ralph instrument, and leverages the strong partnership and experience of GSFC and SwRI in building and operating these instruments (Reuter et al. 2008. Space Sci. Rev. 140, 129-154) Science Objectives: SIRSE has been optimized to meet broad science goals for either a Europa flyby or orbiter mission:  Characterize ice shell and surface-ice-ocean exchange • Map landforms at high vertical and horizontal resolution, with correlated spectral mapping   Determine surface composition and chemistry • Map global composition, correlate geologic features with local composition, and search for key astrobiological & volatile spectral features    Understand surface features and search for active sites • Study chaos, impact craters, double ridges and bands, search for active plumes and deposits, and provide upper limits on thermal anomalies    Understand magnetospheric-surface interactions • Map hemispheric composition, search for radiolytic products in local geology, and determine surface radiative transfer properties   Characterize compelling landing sites and assess hazards • Find sites with unique chemistry, search for sites with recent or current activity, and constrain local topography and slopes   1013.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
