 The  Taxonomic  Distribution  of  Mission-Accessible  Small  Near-Earth  Asteroids.  M.  L.  Hinkle1,  N.  A. Moskovitz2,  D.  E.  Trilling1,  R.  P.  Binzel3,  C.  A.  Thomas4,  D.  Polishook3,  F.  E.  DeMeo5,  M.  Willman6,  E. Christensen7, M. Person3, 1Northern Arizona University, Dept. of Physics & Astronomy, NAU Box 6010, Flagstaff, AZ,  86011  (mhinkle@nau.edu),  2Lowell  Observatory,  1400  West  Mars  Hill  Road,  Flagstaff,  AZ,  86001, 3Massachusetts Institute of Technology,Cambridge, MA, 02139,  4NASA Goddard Space Flight Center,Greenbelt, MD,  20771,  5Harvard-Smithsonian  Center  for  Astrophysics,  Cambridge,  MA,  02138,  6U.  Hawaii/Institute  for Astrophysics,Honolulu, HI, 96822, 7Catalina Sky Survey,University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85721. Introduction:  Scientific interest in the near-Earth asteroid (NEA) population has grown in recent years, particularly  with  regards  to  characterizing  the population  of  mission-accessible  NEAs.  Mission accessibility  is  defined  by  delta-v,  the  change  in velocity required for a spacecraft to rendezvous with a celestial  body.  With  current  propulsion  technology, spacecraft can reach NEAs whose orbits have delta-V < 7 km/s. Across the entire NEA population, the smallest (d < 1 km) objects have not been well-studied, owing to the difficulty of observing them. These very small objects are often targets of opportunity, observable for only a short period of time after their discovery. Even at their brightest (V ~ 18), these asteroids are faint enough that they  must  be  observed  with  large  ground-based telescopes. The  Mission  Accessible  Near-Earth  Object Survey (MANOS) began in August  2013 as a multiyear physical characterization survey that was awarded survey status by NOAO. MANOS will target several hundred  mission-accessible  NEOs across  visible  and near-infrared  wavelengths,  ultimately  providing  a comprehensive  catalog  of  physical  properties (astrometry, light curves, spectra). Methods: Sixty small,  mission-accessible  NEAs were  observed  in  2013  and  2014  using  the  Gemini Multi-Object Spectrograph at Gemini North & South observatories. Taxonomic classifications were obtained by fitting our spectra to the visible wavelength portions of  the  mean  reflectance  spectra  of  the  Bus-DeMeo taxonomy [1]. Results  &  Discussion:  The  smallest  near-Earth asteroids are the likely progenitors of meteorites; we expect  the  observed  fraction  of  ordinary  chondrite meteorites to match that of their parent bodies, S-type asteroids. We present classifications for these objects as  well  as  preliminary  results  for  the  distribution of taxa  (as  a  proxy  for  composition)  as  a  function  of object  size  and  compare  to  the  observed  fraction  of ordinary chondrite meteorites. Acknowledgments: We  acknowledge  support  for MANOS from the NASA NEOO Program under Grant No. NNX14AN82G. Telescope support for MANOS is provided by NOAO and Lowell Observatory. References: [1]  DeMeo F. E., Binzel R. P., et al. (2009) Icarus, 202, 160-180. 