1084.PDF
NWA 7188 EUCRITE: PETROLOGY, CHEMICAL COMPOSITIONS AND EVOLUTION HISTORY.Shaofan Che1, Qi He1 and Long Xiao1 1Planetary Science Institute, Department of Earth Sciences, China Universityof Geosciences, Wuhan.Introduction: Eucrites are differentiatedachondrites and share a common provenance withhowardites and diogenites. Homogenous oxygenisotopic compositions of "HED" group (Δ17O= 0.25±0.05‰ ) [1,2,3] suggest an origin from a sameparent body, and this homogenization of oxygenisotopes was a consequence of high degrees of partialmelting. Researches into this unique asteroid willprovide a profound insight into the formation andevolution of terrestrial planets, especially Earth. Thiswork focuses on the petrographic description andgeochemical analysis of an eucrite from NorthwestAfrica, NWA 7188. Also provided is an outline of thegeological settings involved in its formation.Results: Two texturally differnent parts arerecognized: the main part with gabbro texture and theclasts with ophitic to sub-ophitic texture. Exsolvedlamellae exist in both parts, yet with different widthand density. Tiny pieces of metallic minerals exsolvein some of pyroxene grains forming the cloudingtexture. Rims of some pyroxenes sufferedrecrystallization due to post-metamorphism resulting in120 ° junction between grain boundaries. Meltinclusions composed of pyroxene, chromite and SiO2have been recognized within pyroxene grains. Such acomposition demonstrate that these melt inclusionspreviously were residual melt enclosed by pyroxenes.Similar melt inclusions enclosed in pyroxenes seen inthe main part were also found in calsts, through themetal compound in the melt inclusions is troilite notchromite. Rims of clasts are obscure or eventransitional between clasts and the main part due tothermometamorphism. A clast with a complexpoikilitic texture caught our attention (Fig. 1).Assembalges of pyroxenes, oriented plagioclases,ilmenites and silica are enclosed in a large pyroxenegrain. Such a mineral assemblage present a sharp andstraight boundary with the host pyroxene. Majorelement compositions of minerals were determinedusing the electron microprobe. Compositions ofpyroxenes and plagioclases are consistent between themain part and clasts (Fig. 2).Classification: Textures and chemicalcompositions, especially pyroxene Fe-Mn covariations confirm its classification as an ordinaryeucrite. The application of widely used pyroxeneMn/Fe ratio plot [4] was revised in this work. TheMn/Fe ratio plot yeilds large uncertainties whenapplied to equilibried achondrites. That is, we wouldprobably obtain a compositional region, not a singleline. Overlapping between adjacent regions, especiallythose with approximate ratios, will ineluctably casusesconfusions. The Mn/Fe ratio, therefore, need to becombined with other classification factors in order toacquire tenable results.Fig 1: A special clasr with bar-shape texture, the mineralassemblage is composed of pyroxene (Py), plagioclase (Pl)and chromite (Chr).Fig 2: Pyroxene quadrilateral for NWA 7188.Ranges ofdiogenites (line), cumulate eucrites (dotted line) andordinary eucrites (dashed line) after [7]. Plots outside therestricted areas are due to the relatively larger laser beamthan the width of lamellae.Fig 3: Hypothetical crystallization trends of HEDmeteorites plotted in an An vs. En diagram (Takeda,1997).1084.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Discussion: Two-pyroxene geothermometry [5]yields a small difference between crystallization andequilibration temperatures, (i.e. crystallized at about1050℃ and reached equilibrium at about 900℃) indicatinga rather short metamorphic period. Based onpetrological and geochemical analyses, separateevolution processes for the two different parts wereconcluded. The clasts formed ahead of the main part,and were subjected to short metamorphism caused byoverlying magma lavas [6]. Afterwords, clasts wereenclosed by ascending magma , then took position withthe main part and suffered another metamorphic eventwhich generated exsolution lamellae in the main part.The latter metamorphic event was not supposed to bevery severe, because the primary exsolution texturesand the width of lamellae in the clasts were preservedto some extent. Possible reasons for the compositionalhomogeneity between the main part and clasts are: (1)magmas from which the two parts crystallized wereproducts of different evolution stages of the sameprimary magma; (2) they belonged to two separateprimary magmas, but became homogeneous as a resultof assimilation. However, further analysis on precisetrace element compositions is needed in order todistinguish between the assumptions above. On thebasis of hypothetic crystallization trends proposed by[7], both the main part and clasts approcah the Na-richtrend (Trend B). Therefore, the primitive magma ofNWA 7188 was located at rather deep level of themagma ocean, which was the cause for the richness ofvolatile sodium in plagioclase. The minute differenceof Na contents between the two parts can also beexplained that the earlier emplacement of the primitivemagma of clasts brought about longer vaporization,thus lower Na content.References:[1] Clayton, R. N., Onuma, N., & Mayeda, T. K.(1976) EPSL, 30(1), 10-18.[2] Clayton, R. N., & Mayeda, T. K. (1996) GCA,60(11), 1999-2017.[3] Wiechert, U. H., Halliday, A. N., Palme, H., &Rumble, D. (2004) EPSL, 221(1), 373-382.[4] Papike, J. J., Karner, J. M., & Shearer, C. K.(2003) American Mineralogist, 88(2-3), 469-472.[5] Lindsley, D. H., & Andersen, D. J. (1983) JGR:Solid Earth (1978-2012), 88(S02), A887-A906.[6] Yamaguchi, A., Taylor, G. J., & Keil, K. (1996)Icarus, 124(1), 97-112.[7] Takeda, H. (1997) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci,32(6), 841-853.1084.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
