1109.PDF
CubeSat Deployables on the Lunar Surface?  P.E. Clark1,3, J. Didion2, R. Cox3, N. Ghafoor4 1IACS, Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C. 20064, 2NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt Road, Greenbelt, MD 20771, 3Flexure Engineering, 3518 Fremont Ave. N, #474, Seattle WA 98103, Canadensys Aerospace, 10 Parr Boulevard, Bolton, Ontario L7E 4G9 Canada,  Contact Email: clarkp@cua.edu  Science Rationale: Although samples have been collected from the Moon, the 'dynamics' of the lunar environment itself have not been systematically studied.  ALSEP packages deployed in the equatorial region during the Apollo era are no longer operational (except for passive retroreflectors), but they certainly gave indications of the nature of the fields and particle environment around the Moon.  However, globally (in longitude and latitude) distributed instrument packages taking simultaneous measurements could provide systematic evaluation of the questions that have arisen about the dynamic nature of the lunar environment, the exosphere, dust and volatile transport, charging as a function of exposure to light, solar wind, and plasma, the nature of local and global fields.  Particularly important is the capability of taking measurements for at least some portion of lunar night. These measurements should be provided before lunar landed exploration activities planned over the next decade have a significant impact on the environment. Such measurements will provide a much more comprehensive basis for understanding the protection needed for humans and robotic devices spending any length of time on the lunar surface. Because the lunar surface represents the range of conditions on most solar system objects and yet is far closer than other objects, it also represents an ideal technology testbed.  Concept: In support of Project Constellation, we developed a design concept for LEMS (Lunar Environmental Monitoring Station), an ALSEP-like standalone lunar surface instrument packages without dependence on radioisotope-based batteries [1]. An initial conventional attempt to design an environmental monitoring package with a solar/battery based power system led to a package with a unacceptably large mass (500 kg), over half of which was battery mass. We reduced the mass to 100 kg using radiation hard, cold temperature electronics and innovative thermal balance strategies using multi-layer thin reflective/insulting materials and gravity-assisted heat pipe, and were able to achieve a 10% duty cycle during lunar night.  More recently, we explored the use of state of the art ULT/ULP electronics in support of cubesat form factor deployables for use by HEOMD, as well as for GLXP lander deck or lander leg packages.   Application: Here, we revisit this design concept with existing cubesat technology to be used in support of a fields and particles surface monitoring station. Packages based on the cubesat paradigm, standard platform and component with Class D development, acting as 'pathfinders' for environmental networks on the Moon or elsewhere, could be deployed robotically from lunar landers going to widely different latitude and longitude locations.  Cubesat systems now being developed for deep space, including C&DH/ processing, communication and solar panel deployables, have components/subsystems capable of operating at colder temperatures and intrinsic radiation hardness.  Scalability: How scalable is the thermal design developed for the ALSEP-like LEMS (without RTGs or RHUs) concept for Project Constellation to a cubesat form factor package [2]? A 12U Cubesat would be roughly 1/6 the mass of an ALSEP-like (100 kg versus 15 kg) and, for two to three instruments, require about 1/6 the mass of batteries to support <1/6 of the power requirement (65 W versus <10 W). 2 Cubesat battery  packs (2@ 20Ah) should be good for 20W/hour for 2 hours (5W for 8 hours) and require ¾ U volume. A 10% duty cycle over 14 days (32 hours) running at 5W/hour would require 4 times the battery volume (3U). A system requiring 10W/hour could run at a 5% duty cycle. Assuming a passive thermal design, this power level could allow operation of small particle analyzer, electrical field instrument, and UV spectrometer. Based on preliminary work, with state of the art thermal design, a 5 U payload of compact instruments, such as a small particle analyzer, electrical field instrument, and UV spectrometer, could be supported in a 12 U package with cubesat bus and deployables for power generation and communication (4 U), and 3 U for battery volume. With alternative power storage systems under development, a larger payload might be possible.  Challenges and Potential Solutions:  Two areas of particular interest are new materials allowing more compact, efficient thermal design and energy storage at lower temperatures. The LEMS thermal design concept Figure 1: Concept for original LEMS as described in text. 1109.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
required use of multiple thin, insulating boxes of G10, and a gravity-assisted heat pipe. What technology under development could create a more compact and efficient thermal design?  1) Flexible, lightweight 'smart' materials that would efficiently absorb or release heat as required for lower mass and volume penalty, and that could act as switches to prevent or allow heat flow, and 2) More compact heat pipe technologies, utilizing ionic liquids. In the past, strategies for surviving lunar night have included RTGs, hibernation, and the concept presented for LEMS. What technology under development could create more efficient, lower volume power generation and storage? 1) More efficient, radiation tolerant, compact cubesat deployable solar panels, and 2) Colder operating temperature energy storage technology (depth of charge, number of recharges) (storage, transmission) such as graphene-based supercapacitors linked to produce slower discharge.  References: [1] Clark P.E. et al. (2011) Small cold temperature instrument packages, SPESIF 2011, AIP Conference Proceedings, Physics procedia, 20, 300307; [2] Clark P.E. et al. (2014) http://lunarcubes.com/docs/Clarketal%20CLASS%20LCW4%20 left %20and%20right.pdf 1109.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
