1189.PDF
LOCALIZED ALTERATION  OF  THE  CAPPING  UNIT IN  NILI  FOSSAE,  MARS:  EVIDENCE FOR MULTIPLE  EPISODES OF AQUEOUS ALTERATION. E.  S.  Amador1 and J.  L. Bandfield2,  1University of Washington, Department of Earth and Space Sciences (esamador@uw.edu), 2Space Science Institute.Introduction:  The  Nili  Fossae  region  of  Mars contains  some  of  the  most  mineralogically  diverse bedrock  on  the  planet.  Near-infrared  (NIR)  and thermal-infrared  (TIR)  spectral  imaging  data  have independently, and in collaboration, identified a widerange of primary and secondary mineral phases in the region [e.g.,  1-3].  Here,  we present evidence for the localized alteration of the NE Nili Fossae capping unit, previously  considered  to  be  unaltered. This  was accomplished  through  the  in-depth  analysis  of complementary NIR and TIR spectral datasets and the application of  a method for  determining  the relative abundance of bulk-silica in a rock, to full TIR Thermal Emission  Imaging  System  (THEMIS;  6.5-15  µm wavelengths) images. This application produced more directly  interpretable  maps  that  aided  in  the  rapid identification  rock  units  with  elevated  bulk-silica compositions.Background: Previous studies  of NE Nili Fossae have  identified  three  distinct,  Noachian-aged,  rock units in  stratigraphic  section (Figure  1).  A basement basaltic  unit  bearing  Fe/Mg-phyllosilicate  phases; overlaid by an olivine-rich basalt with local exposures of Mg-carbonate and Mg-phyllosilicates;  and lastly, a capping unit that is typically spectrally featureless in the NIR [e.g., 2]. The capping unit has been interpreted to mark the end of sustained aqueous alteration in the NE region of  Nili  Fossae given  its lack of hydrated mineral signatures in the NIR spectral data [e.g., 1].Analyses of decorrelation stretch (DCS) [4] image sets from THEMIS, which  are highly sensitive to the bulk-rock composition of the martian surface, indicate the presence of elevated bulk-silica surfaces in NE Nili Fossae [5]. The work presented here aims to determine whether  the  elevated  bulk-silica units  are associated with  the  previously  identified  phyllosilicate-bearing units in the region or if they represent a separate unit, and therefore process, altogether.Datasets  and  Methods: THEMIS  Weighted Absorption  Center  Index.  The  interpretation  of THEMIS DCS images  can  be  difficult  in  spectrally diverse  regions  given  the  range  of  surface compositions  and  other  contributing  factors  (e.g., temperature  variations).  In  order  to  produce  a  more easily interpretable image set, we reduced the THEMIS multispectral  dataset  to  a  single,  quantitative parameter; the weighted absorption center or "center of gravity"  wavelength  [6].  THEMIS is sensitive to the bulk-silica abundance  of  surface  materials  as  its wavelength  range  covers  the  diagnostic  Reststrahlen Si-O asymmetric  stretch  absorption  band  between  8 and 12  μm. As  SiO2 abundance  increases  in  surface materials, the Reststrahlen absorption minimum shifts to shorter wavelengths [e.g., 7, 8] and can therefore be used as a proxy for bulk-silica concentration. Smith et al.  [6] showed  that  even  given the  coarse  spectral resolution of the THEMIS dataset, the weighted center for the  integrated  Reststrahlen  feature  can  be  used instead  of  the  true band  minimum in  order  to determine bulk-silica abundance [6]. We  have  further  developed  this  procedure  and applied  it  across  full  THEMIS  atmospherically corrected  surface  emissivity  images  to  create quantitative,  bulk-silica indices (Figure  2).  In  this manner,  we  are  able  to  identify  and  map the occurrences of the elevated bulk-silica units of interest.We  used  NIR  spectral  data  from  the  Compact Reconnaissance  Imaging  Spectrometer  for  Mars (CRISM; ~1.0-3.0 µm wavelengths) to determine the spatial  distribution  of  the  phyllosilicate-bearing surfaces in the region and  their spatial relationship to the elevated bulk-silica  units. CRISM data were also used to  characterize  the NIR  spectral  features of the elevated bulk-silica units, specifically the presence  or absence of absorptions typical of secondary alteration minerals (i.e. hydration and/or metal-OH absorptions). CRISM MSP images (72 spectral bands at 200 m/pixel sampling)  were  relied  upon  for  this  study  as  they provide a broad, regional coverage. Figure 1. Generalized stratigraphy of NE Nili  Fossae,  yellow  unit  on  cap  rock represents local elevated bulk-silica unit.1189.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Results:  Spatial  Distribution  of  elevated  bulksilica units. Weighted absorption center indices clearly highlight the presence of distinct elevated bulk-silica units  centered  around  ~23.5°N,  76.9°E  (Figure  2). Mapping  of both  the  elevated  bulk-silica and  the phyllosilicate-bearing  surfaces  indicate  that  the  two units are  not  spatially  co-located  and  represent  two separate surface-types in the region. The phyllosilicatebearing  surfaces  are  more  broadly  distributed across Nili  Fossae  than the elevated bulk-silica units.  Their only spatial similarity  being their regional association with the olivine-rich basalts.  However, elevated bulksilica units are spatially co-located with surfaces that have been identified as part of the regional cap unit in NE Nili Fossae [1].Spectral  Characterization. Phyllosilicate-bearing surfaces do not show spectral characteristics consistent with elevated bulk-silica concentrations in the TIR, but rather, show emissivity spectra typical of an olivinepoor basalt indicating that the phyllosilicate phases are not a dominant constituent in the unit.  NIR reflectance spectra  for  the  elevated  bulk-silica  units  sometimes show weak signatures of hydration (1.9 µm absorption; Figure  3)  but  no  other  long-wavelength  absorptions consistent  with  phyllosilicate,  zeolite,  sulfate,  or hydrated silica phases.Implications: The detection of the  elevated bulksilica units  in  TIR emissivity  data  indicates  that  the degree of  aqueous alteration  was sufficient enough to alter the bulk-rock composition of  these surfaces [9]. However, it was not sufficient to alter the silica phases to  higher  order  crystalline  structures,  as  in  hydrated silica, which  would  have  been  identifiable  in  NIR reflectance spectra [6].The  NE  Nili  Fossae  capping  unit,  which  was previously  thought  to  be  unaltered,  shows  spectral signatures consistent with localized aqueous alteration. This  extends  the  timeline  in which  sustained  water activity  was  present  in  the  region  to  the stratigraphically youngest unit. References: [1]  Mustard  et  al.,  (2009)  JGR,  114, E00D12.  [2]  Ehlmann  et  al.,  (2009)  JGR,  114, E00D08. [3]  Hamilton  and  Christensen, (2005) Geology,  33,  433-436. [4] Gillespie  et  al.,  (1986) Remo.  Sens.  Env.,  20:209-235.  [5]  Amador  and Bandfield, (2012)  LPSCXLIII,  2508. [6] Smith et al., (2013)  Icarus,  223,  633-648. [7]  Vincent  and Thomson, (1972)  JGR, 77(14), 2465-2472. [8] Walter and  Salisbury,  (1989)  JGR,  94(B7),  9203-9213. [9] Tosca and Knoll, (2009) EPSL, 286, 379-386.Figure 2. (A) Weighted absorption center index map. Low values (red) are proxy for higher abundances of bulk-silica. (B) Enlargement of black box in A, arrows indicate where spectra were collected for C (C) THEMIS surface emissivity spectra from B. CFigure 3. Near-infrared CRISM spectra from MSP 366C. 1189.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
