1208.PDF
  Figure 1: Temporal evolution of Mt. Sharp under different scenarios. The dark red line is the model endpoint. MODELLING DIAGENESIS OF GALE CRATER SEDIMENTARY ROCKS: SCENARIOS TESTABLE BY THE CURIOSITY ROVER. C.S. Borlina1,2, B.L. Ehlmann2,3, 1Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 2Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA.  Introduction: Gale Crater, landing site of the NASA Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, has a unique sedimentary stratigraphy, preserved in 5-km high Mt. Sharp. The history of its sedimentation, erosion, and secondary mineral formation preserves a record of changing geologic processes, climate and habitability on early Mars and determines the preservation potential of organics within its sedimentary rocks. We model heat flow and depths of burial to predict the temperature history of sedimentary rocks presently exposed at the surface, providing scenario-dependent predictions of diagenetic mineralogy in locations between Yellowknife Bay and upper Mt. Sharp that will be visited by the MSL Curiosity rover.   Model: We consider two formation scenarios: (1) complete filling of Gale crater followed by partial removal of deposited sediments [1] or (2) building of a central deposit with morphology controlled by slope winds and only incomplete sedimentary fill of Gale crater [2]. Model inputs are described below [for complete methods, 3]. Pristine and modern topography: The pristine topographic profile was determined based on observed crater depth-diameter relationships from the MOLA dataset [4- 7]. We set the initial shape of Gale Crater to be 154 km in diameter and 5 km deep with a central peak height of 1.55 km. To have realistic slopes, we scaled the average topographic profile from Moreux crater (45E, 42N) to fit Gale's parameters. The modern average profile was used as the model endpoint. Sedimentation Scenarios: Figure 1 shows the time evolution of the considered scenarios. Scenario 1 is characterized by a complete fill of the crater to the peak of Mt. Sharp, followed by partial erosion, leaving the modern shape of Mt. Sharp as final output [1]. Sedimentation and erosion rates are computed linearly based on the defined timescales (discussed below) for erosion/sedimentation processes and necessary burial/erosion height. Scenario 2 [2] is defined by an aeolian process where the mound grew close to the center of the crater with the surrounding topography creating strong mound-flank slope winds capable of eroding the mound. Scenario 2a is defined with a constant deposition rate: the mound grows tall with a relatively constant width over time. Scenario 2b has a linearly decreasing deposition rate over time, and the mound grows wide then steepens and narrows.  Timescales: Pinning surface ages based on crater counts in absolute time is challenged by the existence of different chronology models [8] yet necessary for tying burial history to models of the secular cooling of Mars. Consequently, we examine three different temporal models for the fill and exhumation of Mt. Sharp: (1) a standard model, (2) a maximum diagenesis model, and (3) a minimum diagenesis model. For (1), Mt. Sharp formation begins at 3.7 Ga, reaches 5 km in height, and is then exhumed to reach its present extent by 3.3 Ga. For (2), Gale crater and Mt. Sharp form early, 3.85 Gyr, and Mt. Sharp is exhumed late, 3.0 Gyr, thus providing a maximum for heat flow and duration of burial. For (3), Mt. Sharp forms late, 3.6 Gyr and is quickly exhumed by 3.4 Gyr.  Thermal model: We use the one-dimensional steady-state heat conduction solution that describes the temperature T as a function of the depth, z, and time, t:  where T0 is mean surface temperature, q(t) is heat flow as a function of time, k is thermal conductivity, ρ is density and H(t) crustal heat production as a function of time. We define ρ = 2500 kg/m3 and k = 2 W/m°C, values typical for average sedimentary rocks [9]. We examine two possibilities for early Mars mean surface temperature: T0 = 0°C and T0 = -50°C. The first presumes a warmer early Mars where temperatures rou1208.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
 Figure 2: (a) shows MSL’s traverse. (b) and (c) show the maximum temperature expecienced in the past by sedimentary rocks along MSL’s traverse.               tinely exceed the melting point of water ice during large portions of the Martian year; the latter represents modern-day average equatorial temperature. Finally,  q(t) and H(t) were estimated by curve-fitting geophysical models for the evolution of heat flow [10] and crustal heat production [11], respectively, through time.      MSL’s traverse: In order to locate MSL traverse locations (Fig. 2a), we compute the ratio between the distance of the closest rim to Yellowknife Bay and the distance of the rim to the base of Mt. Sharp. This is necessary because different models output mounds of different widths, and proper location of the rover relative to the mound is crucial for computation of overburden rates. Yellowknife Bay is at 0.93 of the distance between the closest rim and the foothill of the output mound. The unconformity is at a point ~1000 m higher than Yellowknife Bay. This range represents MSL’s future traverse range.       Results: In Scenario 1, with the time period equally split into an interval of net erosion followed by interval of net deposition, average rates of erosion and deposition are 6-27 µm/yr and 8-34 µm/yr, respectively. In Scenario 2a average erosion rates fall between 521 µm/yr, while average deposition rates range from 521 µm/yr. In Scenario 2b average erosion rates are 729 µm/yr while deposition rates range from 8-35 µm/yr. These rates moderately exceed estimated erosion rates elsewhere on early Mars, 0.7-10 µm/yr, but are at the lower end of erosion rates from Earth, 2100µm/yr [12].        For a cold early Mars (T0=-50⁰C), Scenario 1 leads to conditions where water would be liquid and, if water were present, smectite would be transformed to illite or chlorite everywhere from Yellowknife to Mt. Sharp. Maximum temperatures reached are ~100ºC and ~70ºC at Yellowknife Bay and Mt. Sharp, respectively (Fig. 2b and 2c). Scenario 2a does not generate conditions above 0ºC; there would be no alteration or diagenesis in situ unless driven by salty brines. Scenario 2a implies that swelling clays like smectites (if formed in subzero temperatures or by another process) should be the dominant clay from Yellowknife Bay and Mt. Sharp. Scenario 2b predicts liquid water at Mt. Sharp that could facilitate diagenetic transitions, though temperatures above 40ºC are not reached. Under Scenario 2b, at Yellowknife Bay the 0ºC threshold is not reached, and only freezing point-depressed brines are permitted.        For warm early Mars (T0=0⁰C), liquid water that might cause alteration and diagenesis would be available everywhere between Yellowknife Bay and Mt. Sharp under all scenarios. Maximum temperatures greater than 100ºC occur at both Yellowknife Bay and Mt Sharp i n scenario 1, strongly favoring transformation of smectites to illites or chlorites. In both Scenarios 2a and 2b, temperatures above 40ºC are reached at Mt. Sharp, while only in Scenario 2b is this threshold exceeded at Yellowknife Bay.  Conclusions: Mineralogical predictions for locations close to Yellowknife Bay vary with the choice of a cold or warm early Mars and the Mt. Sharp sedimentation scenario. For (1), temperatures experienced by sediments should decrease monotonically over the traverse and up Mt. Sharp stratigraphy, whereas for (2) maximum temperatures are reached in the lower units of Mt. Sharp and thereafter decline or hold roughly constant. Under partial fill scenarios, evidence of diagenesis at higher temperatures is expected as MSL moves towards Mt. Sharp, with peak temperatures reached prior to the unconformity. Comparing our predictions with future MSL results on secondary mineral assemblages, their spatial variation as a function of location on the traverse, and age of any authigenic phases will constrain the timing and timescale of Mt. Sharp formation, paleosurface temperature, the availability and setting of liquid water on early Mars, and the organic preservation potential of these deposits.  Acknowledgements: Thanks to E. Kite for sharing his code to create slope-wind elevation profiles, the Caltech SURF program for the summer internship opportunity, and the MSL participating scientist program for partial support. References: [1] Malin & Edgett (2000) Science, 290 [2] Kite et al (2013) Geology, 41 [3] Borlina & Ehlmann, submitted, JGR [4] Garvin et al (2003) 6th Mars Science Conf [5] Boyce & Garbeil (2007) GRL  34 [6] Robbins & Hynek (2012), JGR, 117 [7] Kalynn et al (2013) GRL 40 [8] Werner & Tanaka (2011) Icarus, 215, [9] Beardsmore & Cull (2001) [10] Parmentier & Zuber (2007) JGR 112 [11] Hahn et al (2011) GRL 38 [12] Golombek et al (2006) JGR 111 1208.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
