1210.PDF
HIGH-RESOLUTION STRUCTURAL AND GEOLOGIC MAPPING IN CANDOR CHASMA. C. H. Okubo, U.S. Geological Survey, 1541 E. University Blvd., Tucson, AZ, 85721, cokubo@usgs.gov.    Introduction:  High-resolution geologic and structural mapping of four key sites in west Candor Chasma is nearing completion, and new mapping is commencing at three sites in east Candor Chasma (Fig. 1). These high-resolution maps are constructed using digital elevation models (DEMs) and orthorectified imagery constructed from stereo HiRISE observations. The maps have been, or will be, formally published through the US Geological Survey's Scientific Investigations Map series at 1:18,000 scale. This paper presents a synthesis of results from west Candor and introduces the three new sites in east Candor.  West Candor Chasma:  Mapping in west Candor Chasma focused on the separate regions of central Candor Colles, southeast and west Ceti Mensa and east Candor Sulci. The central Candor Colles map has been published [1] and the remaining three maps are currently under review. These maps focus on the stratified sedimentary deposits within the chasma - the canonical Late Hesperian to Early Amazonian "Interior deposits" of [2] and others. Collectively, mapping relationships reveal that landslides of chasma wall rock (Ceti Labes and Candor Labes) predate deposition of the local sedimentary deposits. This and other onlap relationships establish that these sedimentary deposits accumulated within the chasma, and rule out alternative interpretations that the chasma formed after the sediments were deposited. Bedding morphologies and onlap relationships within the sedimentary deposits indicate that they accumulated in wet playa-like environments. Dune bedforms are present but rare, being only clearly observed the west Ceti Mensa map area. The majority of the strata have morphologies consistent with sand sheets. Additional evidence supporting extant shallow groundwater during sedimentation is found in the form of soft-sediment deformation. Contorted bedding is observed in most map areas. More spectacular are the first rigorous identifications of injectite megapipes on Mars, the Candor Colles. These injectites formed contemporaneously with several newly identified fault zones along the southern flank of Ceti Mensa. Their contemporaneous nature indicates that seismicity due to slip along these faults triggered liquefaction of the surrounding water-saturated, poorly lithified sediments and formation of the injectite megapipes. Structural evidence of slope failure of the sedimentary deposits is found in each of the four west Candor Chasma map areas. These landslides are manifest as circular failures, translational slides or soil spreads. The aforementioned fault zones along the southern flank of Ceti Mensa are the basal surfaces of a landslide complex. Thus these slope failures are interpreted to have triggered the formation of the Candor Colles and associated soft-sediment deformation. The faults along southern flank of Ceti Mensa are also notable for providing the first recognized exposures of a fault damage zone on Mars. These damage zones are 100-200 m wide and surround the faults along most of their exposed length. Structural analysis of the damage zone architecture indicates that it is predominantly composed of deformation bands arranged in a ladder structure [3] geometry. These observations indicate that the sediments were porous, granular, and poorly indurated at the time of landsliding. The sedimentary deposits also exhibit evidence of recurrent periods where sedimentation ceased and eolian erosion was widespread.  These hiatuses in deposiFigure 1. Locations of the maps discussed in this paper. Background is a THEMIS daytime infrared mosaic. 1210.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
tion are recorded as prominent unconformities that can be traced through large areas of west Candor. The sedimentary deposits are divided into geologic units based on these regional unconformities - the units are allostratigraphic. Eleven sedimentary units are mapped in total amongst the four map areas and some units are observed in multiple maps. Many more allostratigraphic divisions are observed outside of the map areas, recording more than twenty-five periods of regional erosion. The cause of the transition from subaerial deposition to massive eolian downcutting has not yet been constrained through mapping. These periods of regional eolian erosion are interpreted to have contributed to the observed slope failures. The regional unconformities dip at steeper angles than bedding does. Therefore eolian erosion and downcutting resulted in steepening of the longwavelength paleotopography, thereby contributing to a destabilization of the sediment slopes. Seismicity from near by impacts may have also triggered landslides. Landsliding occurred contemporaneously with sediment accumulation. The central Candor Colles and southeast and west Ceti Mensa map areas show clear evidence of landslides of sedimentary deposits being deflated along regional unconformities, and then buried by subsequent sedimentary units. East Candor Chasma:  Though insightful, the results from the relatively small areas studied in west Candor Chasma offer only a glimpse into the broader geologic history of Valles Marineris. In order to realize the full potential that high-resolution structural and geologic mapping have for unraveling the geologic history of Valles Marineris, additional high-resolution mapping must be undertaken in other chasmata. East Candor Chasma is selected as the next logical focus area. This region has received relatively little attention with respect to post-Viking era mapping despite being physiographically comparable to west Candor Chasma and containing morphologically similar stratified deposits. Many of the same geologic units are identified by [3] in both the eastern and western parts of Candor Chasma. Thus results from this expanded mapping effort can be used to develop an integrated geologic history of Candor Chasma as a whole. Mapping in east Candor Chasma will focus on three separate areas that have yet to be given formal geographic names. Just as with the west Candor Chasma mapping, these maps will concentrate on the stratified deposits within the chasma and their relationship to the chasma wall rock and its derived deposits. Map area 1 encompasses the contacts between an inselberg of chasma wall rock and stratified deposits on the floor of east Candor Chasma. Though [2] interpret most of the deposits here as landslide material derived from the chasma wall, HiRISE observations show that the deposits are well stratified. Thus, refined mapping at the HiRISE scale may lead to these deposits being reinterpreted as sediments. This map area also encompasses a part of the proposed chasma-related normal fault that bounds the north side of east Candor Chasma (c.f., [4]). As such, this map area offers an opportunity to document any evidence of chasmarelated faulting, and any superposition relationships therein, within the wall rock and stratified deposits. Map area 2 falls along the proposed chasma-related normal fault that bounds the south side of east Candor Chasma, and encompasses Hesperian- and Amazonianaged interior deposits of [2]. Given this wide range of unit ages, quantifying the styles, distribution, and superposition relationships of deformation here will help to constrain the timing and duration of any chasmarelated faulting in east Candor. Some workers suggest that the older layered deposits contain chasma-related faults, which are buried by younger layered deposits in west Candor (e.g., [5,6]). Thus map area 2 provides an optimal location to test for such relationships in east Candor. HiRISE observations here also reveal possible morphologic evidence of inverted fluvial channels within some stratified deposits. Documenting any occurrences of such landforms would provide new insight into their controlling depositional environments recorded in east Candor. Map area 3 is located along the same putative chasma-related normal fault as map area 2. This map area encompasses a spur of the chasma wall rock, as well as a variety of stratified deposits. Of the three map areas in east Candor, this area is most analogous to the west Candor map areas, as it contains Hesperian- and Amazonian-aged interior deposits and Noachian-aged wall rock. Observations here will help to evaluate the broader applicability of the general timing and depositional environments found in west Candor Chasma.  Summary:  High-resolution structural and geologic mapping in west Candor Chasma reveals that the stratified deposits on the floor of the chasma are basinfilling sediments that were deposited in a wet playalike setting. These sediments were sculpted by occasional periods of regional erosion, landsliding, and soft-sediment deformation. This research is now being extended into east Candor Chasma, with the goal of developing a more complete and detailed geologic history for this part of Valles Marineris. References: [1] Okubo C.H. (2014) USGS SIM 3309. [2] Witbeck N.E. et al. (1991) USGS Map I2010. [3] Schultz R.A. and Balasko C.M. (2003) GRL, 30, 2033. [4] Schultz R.A. and Lin J. (2001) JGR, 106, 16549-16566. [5] Fueten F. et al. (2006) GRL, 33, L07202. [6] Fueten F. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, E10008. 1210.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
