1263.PDF
EXPERIMENTAL SIMULATIONS OF RECURRING SLOPE LINEAE. E.A. Eddings1,2, M.E. Sylvest2, J.C. Dixon2,3, and V.F. Chevrier2, 1Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geophysics, Connecticut College, New London, CT 06320 [eeddings@conncoll.edu] 2Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, 3Department of Geosciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701.  Introduction: Recurring slope lineae (RSL) are dark streaks that have recently been observed on the surface of Mars. They occur principally on equatorfacing, southern hemisphere slopes. RSL appear seasonally, grow longer and darker in warm summer months and fade in the colder winter months (Fig 1.) [1]. A likely mechanism for their formation involves the thawing of brine-rich permafrost as summermonth temperatures can reach 250-300K in areas of RSL occurrence [1]. As brine-rich water has a lower melting point than pure water, they represent a likely source for liquid water on Mars. Ideas on the origin of RSL were initially formulated from observations related to the formation of wet streaks in Antarctica. Here, the seasonal thawing of salt-rich permafrost in the summer results in the formation of long, dark, wet streaks which subsequently disappear in the winter, and reappear the following summer (Fig 2) [2]. In an effort to test this model of formation we simulate RSL formation under laboratory conditions.   Figure 1: RSL extending downslope in Melas Chasma   Figure 2: Wet streaks in Antarctica exhibit similar seasonality to RSL [2]    Methods: Laboratory experiments were conducted using an open-top, plexiglass box measuring approximately 30cm long, 10cm wide, with sloping sides from 15cm to 2.5cm high. All experiments were conducted using quartz playground sand and pure water.  Preparation of a permafrost layer was undertaken by mixing dry sand with sufficient water to saturate the sand without the presence of excess water. This mixture was spread evenly on the bottom of the plexiglass box to a depth of approximately 4cm. In the initial set of experiments the plexiglass box was placed in a domestic freezer until the bottom wet layer was completely frozen. A dry layer of sand was then spread across the simulated permafrost with varying topography for each experiment. All experiments were conducted at a slope angle of approximately 12 degrees.  The simulated permafrost environment was then thawed at ambient temperature. During thawing, observations were consistently made for the appearance of wet streaks. In those experiments in which wet streaks appeared, the box was placed back in the freezer, refrozen and removed again upon freezing. This protocol simulated diurnal freeze/thaw of the permafrost. In a second set of experiments, a cold room and heat lamp were used to simulate freeze-thaw cycles under more extreme environmental conditions. Freezing of the permafrost layer was conducted at 20C followed by thawing at an ambient temperature of 4C, using a 150W heat lamp to simulate direct solar insolation. Experiments utilized a box of similar size, but this time constructed from copper rather than plexiglass. Experiments mimicked those conducted under previously described conditions, but additionally included the effects of the presence of large fragments on the sand surface. Successive experiments examined the impact of irregular shaped particles (4cm diameter nuts) and spherical boulders (8cm diameter steel balls). These objects were placed partially in the permafrost layer at the top of the slope. Following placement of the "boulders," the permafrost layer was frozen and subsequently covered with dry sand. The entire box was then chilled to -20C. Upon complete cooling, the copper box was removed to the 4C room and thawed with the heat lamp. Once wet streaks were observed the box was returned to the -20C cold room and the experiment repeated upon complete re-freezing.       1263.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Results and Discussion:  Initial experiments failed to produce any results. In these experiments dry sand surfaces were either flat or gently sloped and as the permafrost layer began to thaw, the dry sand simply wetted by capillary processes and no evidence of wet streaks were observed. Wet streak development however was observed when the surface of the dry sand was sloped perpendicular to the slope of the Perspex box. Under this experimental condition, wetting of the thinner sand at the bottom of the slope displayed darkening and slight development of a linear depression (Fig. 3).  The most distinct wet streaks developed when the dry sand overburden surface was irregular with ridges and an intervening depression. Under these conditions, the dry sand layer possessed variable thickness. Distinct wet streaks developed in association with the surface depression (Fig. 4). Upon thawing following dark streak development there was subsequent dark streak reoccurrence, however there was more pervasive darkening of the dry sand surface, presumably due to the presence of water in the vicinity of the initial wet streak. The principle limitation of the initial set of experiments is the size of the plexiglass box. Wetting consistently occurred most rapidly at the bottom of the box where sand was thinnest.  Figure 3: Wetting  The wet streak observed in the topographic depression developed as the permafrost layer thawed and the resulting melt water was drawn up through the dry sand to the surface. As the thickness of the sand was least in the depression, the water reached the surface there first. Upon refreezing and subsequently rethawing, however, the water was higher in the dry sand column and therefore wetting occurred more extensively than simply being concentrated in the channel. The second set of experiments which involved the placement of regular and irregularly shaped "boulders" on the surface reveal some preliminary results. The coarser debris particles appear to enhance the rate of thawing of the permafrost, as sites in the immediate vicinity of the large particles showed evidence of wetting before other areas of dry sand. This observation suggests that regolith texture may also play a role with larger particles providing loci for wet streak (and RSL) initiation due to their greater thermal inertia. There does not appear to be any significant influence by coarse particle shape.   Figure 4: Wet streak formation in central depression   The experimental simulations reported in this paper suggest that there is some experimental validity to the idea that wet streaks and RSL development is associated with seasonal permafrost thawing and freezing. Conclusions and Future Work: From the two sets of experiments reported in this study it is concluded that diverse regolithic environments are required for wet streak and RSL development. It appears that there are at least three diversity elements of significance. First and foremost, topographic diversity appears to be an essential element with depressions being focal points for initiation. Secondly, it appears that regolith thickness is essential for determining necessary variability in rates of wetting. Thirdly, it appears that textural diversity, especially the presence of large particles also aids initiation of wet streaks and RSL. As this study represents a first attempt to simulate RSL using the Antarctic wet streak analog, future work will focus on replication of these preliminary results and quantifying the controls identified in this study.  References: [1] McEwen, A. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 740-743 [2] Levy, J. (2012) Icarus,219, 1-4 [3] McEwen, A. et al. (2014) Nature Geoscience, 7, 53-58. Acknowledgements: This research was funded by NSF grant 1157002. We thank Dr. OwensHanning, University of Arkansas, for use of her cold room and EAE thanks Dr. Julia Kennefick for the opportunity to participate in the University of Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Sciences REU program.  1263.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
