1269.PDF
REVISITING THE YOUNGEST MARE BASALTS ON THE MOON: ANALYSIS OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CRATER DISTRIBUTIONS IN THE REGION SOUTH OF ARISTARCHUS CRATER  A. Stadermann1, M. Zanetti1, B. Jolliff1, H. Hiesinger2; 1Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences & McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences, Washington University in St. Louis (acstadermann@wustl.edu), 2Institut für Planetologie, Westfälische Wilhelms - Universität Münster, Germany.  Introduction: The mare flood basalts south of Aristarchus Crater have been determined to have an absolute model age (AMA) of ~1.2 Ga from crater size-frequency distribution (CSFD) measurements in an area to the west of Aristarchus Crater [1] (white box in Fig 1). According to this measurement, this basalt unit is one of the youngest on the Moon, and extends eastward from the area where it was dated to the edge of the mare south and east from Aristarchus Crater (unit P60 in [1]). This large area is of special interest because this basaltic unit, as mapped using Clementine spectral color variations [1], provides temporal constraints on the thermal evolution of the Moon [2]. As such, it is a high priority target for future exploration, either in-situ or for sample return, to determine the absolute age extents and better understand young volcanism on the Moon. Its proximity to Aristarchus Crater is also key with respect to the possibility to determine the absolute age of Aristarchus and sample its unique ejecta. However, the P60 region is also heavily contaminated by secondary crater chains and clusters related to the Aristarchusforming impact, and therefore it is unclear if the whole unit is actually represented by the 1.2 Ga age.  The purpose of this study is to further investigate the young basalts (P60) with the following objectives: (1) to confirm the crater-distribution age result by counting the primary craters from the count region in [1] using new LROC images; (2) to count all of the craters in the P60 region using LROC-WAC (100 m/pixel) [3], separating them into primary and secondary craters based on their clustering and presence in bright rays. Using these data it is possible to constrain the age of the region as a whole by carefully analyzing sub-areas that are least affected by secondary craters; and (3) to look for regional AMA variations, in places with no secondary crater rays, and radial (to Aristarchus) AMA variation, to determine if and how the apparent age of sub-areas varies with distance from Aristarchus and possible volcanic source vents. This objective will allow us to infer the effects of secondary craters that are not obviously associated with rays and clusters, and help determine if the area was emplaced as a single unit. Our overarching goal is to determine if the age of the P60 region can be determined by removing obvious secondary contamination and to better understand, in this well-controlled setting, the effects of       Figure 1: WAC mosaic of the P60 mare area south of Aristarchus. The white box in the west shows the location of the crater count area in [1]. The western half of the image shows primary craters mapped in red and secondary craters mapped in yellow. The eastern side shows an overlay of secondary craters in black onto a point-density map, derived from the primary and secondary crater counts. The regions of high crater density (red and orange) correlate strongly with secondary crater chains. Regions of low crater density are shown in blue and purple, and correspond to areas relatively free of secondary contamination. White arrows point to vents in and around the unit that may be volcanic sources. 1269.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
non-obvious secondary impact cratering on such age determinations.  Methods: Using Clementine data, the volcanic unit (P60) and count area in [1] was reconstructed. All craters visible in LROC-WAC imagery in this unit were counted (craters >400 m diameter easily resolved; Fig. 1) in ArcGIS using CraterTools. Crater chains, clusters, and craters with herringbone shaped ejecta patterns were mapped and marked as secondary craters. All others were mapped as primary craters. CSFDs of the primary crater populations were made using CraterStats and AMAs were calculated using Chronology and Production Functions from Neukum et al., 2001 [4, 5]. The AMAs for all primary craters in subareas of this unit were calculated by subtracting the total area of the secondary crater chains. By subtracting the area of the secondary crater chains, the parts of this mare that have been altered by secondary craters from Aristarchus should be eliminated or greatly reduced. Creating a point density map serves as a means of visualizing variation of crater density across the unit (Fig. 1, right side); a cell size of 100 m (the resolution of the WAC mosaic) and a search radius of 5 km were used to create the map in Fig 1.  Results: Analysis of the CSFDs of subareas yield the following results: (1) Our new AMA for the count region of [1] is 1.2 Ga ± 0.1 Ga, confirming exactly the model age of [1]. (2) The summed CSFD for the entire P60 area after subtracting areas marked as affected by obvious secondaries yields a resurfacing curve that is best fit using two different isochrons for two different crater diameter ranges (Fig. 2). An isochron of 3.58 Ga fits craters between 2-10 km diameter. Craters smaller than 400 m cannot be confidently counted on 100 m/pixel data. If the fit range is restricted to craters in the 400 m to 1.3 km range, we obtain an AMA of 1.82 Ga ± 0.04. (3) In 11 areas of low crater density, AMAs had an average of 1.7 Ga, and a standard deviation of 0.53 Ga. With errors, this AMA is consistent with [1] and our restricted AMA of 1.82 Ga. High crater density consisted of 2 craters per square km. Regions of low crater density were regions with 0.1 craters per square km, and consisted of areas without obvious secondary contamination. Discussion: We interpret the AMAs shown in Fig. 2 as reflecting a resurfacing event (basalt emplacement) corresponding to the 1.5-2.0 Ga data, and in all likelihood, younger, because even our subtracted data likely contain difficult-to-detect secondaries. The older segment (3.58 Ga), seen for the larger craters, likely represents the age of the underlying surface, which is an older basalt surface. The "inflection" seen in the CSFD at roughly 2 km is typical of a resurfacing event [6]. Craters smaller than 400 m appear to be overproduced according to cratering rate functions in [4], which is likely due to additional secondary contamination from Aristarchus and other nearby craters. Upon close inspection, craters larger than 2 km appear to be embayed by a younger flow. Ghost craters of similar size can also be seen buried beneath this lava flow. The entire region likely contains more difficult-to-detect secondaries making the 1.82 Ga an upper estimate of the time of the resurfacing event; if difficult-to-detect (non-clustered) secondaries remain in the count areas, it would mean that the 1.82 Ga age could be consistent with [1].  Several volcanic vents occur in this region that could have been sources for this younger flow (Fig. 1, white arrows). Additionally, the older, background age of 3.58 Ga roughly corresponds to an age of 3.2 Ga found by [7], who used crater degradation methods.  References: [1] Hiesinger, H. et al. (2003), JGR, 108, E7 [2] Shearer, C. et al., (2006) New Views of the Moon, Ch. 4, Sec. 5.12 [3] Robinson, M. et al. (2010), Space Sci. Rev. 150 [4] Neukum, G. et al. (1973), LSC 4, S4, V3 [5] Neukum, G. et al. (2001), Space Sci. Rev. 96 [6] Hartmann, W. et al. (1981) Basaltic Volcanism on the Terrestrial Planets, Ch. 8 [7] Boyce, J. (1976), Proc. LSC 7, p. 2717.  Figure 2: CSFD with all primary craters. In blue is the AMA calculated for craters with diameters between 400 m and 1.3 km, showing an age of 1.82 Ga. In the lower right, in black, is the background age of the mare, 3.58 Ga, calculated with only craters larger than 2 km. 1269.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
