1293.PDF
Formation of co-orbital rubble-pile satellites by spreading of Roche-interior particle disks.   Ryuki Hyodo (ryukih@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp), Keiji Ohtsuki  Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences. Kobe University. Kobe 657-8501, Japan  Introduction:  In our solar system, the planets have a variety of satellite systems. The Earth and Pluto have a single relatively large satellite, the Moon (Ms/Mp~0.012) and Charon (Ms/Mp~0.1), respectively, where Ms and Mp is the mass of the satellite and central planet, respectively. On the other hand, the giant planets such as Saturn and Uranus have relatively small multiple satellites (Ms/Mp~10-4-10-5). Their inner major satellites are located outside the planet’s Roche limit, on nearly circular non-inclined prograde orbits.  Formation of large regular satellites of Jupiter and Saturn has been explained by accretion in a circum- planetary gas disk [e.g., 1,2]. On the other hand, it has been shown that systems of regular satellites of Saturn, Uranus and Neptune can be formed by spreading of  circumplanetary particle disks within the Roche limit [3]. Formation of satellites from a circumplanetary particle disk within the Roche limit was first studied in the context of lunar formation [e.g., 4,5]. Initially, par- ticles are distributed within the Roche limit and their accretion is prohibited. Then, the disk spreads with time. The disk evolution is regulated by its viscosity and the viscosity is regulated by spiral patterns, which develop in the disk by gravitational instability [6]. As the disk spreads and the disk materials diffuse beyond the Roche limit, the materials start to form gravitationally bound aggregates [4,5].  Recently, we have performed high-resolution Nbody simulations of the evolution of circumplanetary particle disks initially confined within the planet’s Roche limit [7]. We found that in the case of relatively massive disks, systems of a large single satellite similar to the Moon or Charon are formed [see also 4,5]. However, if the initial disk is less massive, the viscosity of the disk is lower and the time scale of disk diffusion is much longer. In this case, a satellite formed outside the Roche limit is less massive and migrates outward by larger distance through the interaction between the remnant disk. In addition, when the first satellite migrates outward by large distance, a significant amount of disk mass still remains. Therefore, another satellite is again formed just outside the Roche limit, becoming multiple-satellite systems. Thus, the satellite formation process in less massive disks is different from the lunar formation process [3,7].  Interestingly enough, not only satellite systems have diversity on the radial directions as mentioned above but also on the azimuthal directions.  For example, some of Saturnian satellites have co-orbital and Trojan satellites.  Moreover, it is suggested that the Moon used to have a companion but later they experienced mutual collision, resulting in the formation of the highlands of the Moon [8].  In the present work, we perform N-body simulations in order to see if the co-orbital or Trojan satellites can be formed by spreading of Roche-interior particle disks.   Method: We adopt the method of global N-body simulation. The orbits of particles are integrated with the 4th-order Hermite method with shared timestep. All particles in the disk are initially identical size. Since the initial number of particles, N=30,000-50,000, in the simulation is somewhat large and distributed spatially, we have used GRAPE-DR systems which is the special purpose hardware for the gravity calculations, with OpenMP parallelization at the other calculations. When particles spread outside the Roche limit, particles start to form gravitational rubble-pile satellites. However, when some of formed these satellites are scattered back inside the Roche limit by mutual interaction, tidal effect of the central planet disrupts the satellites. Moreover, in the tidal field nearby the Roche limit, even by smaller impact velocities than the mutual escape velocities, the rubble-pile satellites can experience significant disruption [9]. Therefore, rubble pile model that does not allow any accretion between particles would need to be used to investigate such satellite accretion process. However, rubble pile model accompanies much computational costs, and thus it is difficult to handle longer-term orbital evolutions of formed satellites. Here in order to solve collisions, we only allow particles to accrete under some limited conditions, i.e., when satellites are large enough compared to other smaller rubble-pile objects and the satellites  migrate outside enough where tidal effects becomes weaker [see 7 for more details].  Initially, particles are randomly distributed within the Roche limit with low eccentricities. Initial disk mass is on the order of 10-2Mp.  Results: We found that in some cases co-orbital or Trojan rubble-pile satellites are formed as a consequence of disk spreading. We also found that formation of such rubble-pile satellites are more likely to occur at the formation of smaller multiple-satellite systems formed from less massive initial disks compared to the formation of larger single satellites formed form massive disks [see also 7]. This could be due to the “quietness” of the much longer-term disk spreading 1293.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
in the case of the evolution of less massive disks compared to rapid evolutions in the case of more massive disks. However, in the case of multiple-satellite systems, the inner satellites formed after the formation of outer satellites migrate faster than the outer satellites, and thus can pass through or be captured in a mean motion resonance. Therefore, outer and inner satellites interact each other through the resonant torques and the co-orbital or Trojan rubble-pile satellites can become unstable, resulting in mutual collision or scattering of one of them outside the co-orbital region [see also 7]. Our results suggest that the stability of coorbital or Trojan rubble-pile satellites in the longerterm evolution would be important for the collision history of the satellites as well as the formation of lunar highlands. It is also important for better understanding of the final satellite systems formed from spreading of the Roche-interior particle disks. We plan to investigate these matters more quantitatively in the future work.  References:  [1] Canup, R. M, & Ward, W. R., (2009), in Europa, ed. R. T. Pappalardo, et al. (Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona Press), 59; [2] Estrada, P. R., et al., (2009), in Europa, ed. R. T. Pappalardo et al. (Tucson, AZ: Univ. Arizona Press), 27; [3] Crida, A. & Charnoz, S., (2012), Science 338, 1196; [4] Ida, S., et al., (1997), Nature, 389, 353; [5] Kokubo, E. & Ida, S., (2000), Icarus, 148, 419; [6] Takeda, T. & Ida S, (2001) ApJ 540, 514; [7] Hyodo, R., et al., (2015), ApJ, in press; [8] Jutzi, M., & Asphaug, E., (2011), Nature, 476, 69; [9] Hyodo, R., & Ohtsuki, K., (2014), ApJ, 787, 56 1293.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
