 A GEOPHYSICAL MISSION TO VENUS: RESULT OF THE ALPBACH SUMMER SCHOOL 2014.   R.­J. Koopmans1, A. Łosiak2, A. Białek3, A. Donohoe4, M. Fernández Jiménez5, B. Frasl6, A. Gurciullo7, A. Kleinschneider8, T. Mannel9, I. Muñoz Elorza10, D. Nilsson11, M. Oliveira12, P. M. Sørensen­Clark13, R. Timoney14, I. van Zelst15 1FOTEC Forschungs­ und Technologietransfer GmbH, Wiener Neustadt, Austria, 2Institute of Geological Sciences, Polish  Academy of  Science,  Wroclaw,  Poland,  3Space  Research  Centre  Polish  Academy of  Science,  Warsaw, Poland, 4Maynooth University, Ireland, 5Universidad Carlos III, Madrid, Spain 4, 6Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik, Vienna, Austria, 7Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Delft University of Tech­ nology, Delft, the Netherlands,  9Institute for Space Research, Graz, Austria,  10HE Space Operations GmbH, Bre­ men, Germany,  11Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden,  12Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal, 13University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,  14University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom,  15Department of Earth Sciences, Utrecht University, the Netherlands Introduction:    Venus   has   been   investigated   by only five dedicated mission programs since the begin­ ning of space flight. This relatively low level of inter­ est is remarkable when considering that mass and ra­ dius of Venus are very similar to Earth's, while at the same   time   characteristics   such   as   spin   rate,   atmo­ spheric composition, pressure and temperature,  make Venus a very different, inhabitable world. The under­ lying causes of these differences are not well  under­ stood.   Apprehending   Venus'   tectonics   and   internal structure  would  not  only  shed   light  on   the  question why those two planets evolved so differently, but also help refining current models of planetary systems for­ mation. In order to answer the question about reasons for   differences   in   evolution   of   those   two   planets   a group of 15 young scientists and engineers designed a mission to Venus during a follow­up of the Alpbach Summer School 2014. The primary  objective of  this mission is to learn whether Venus is tectonically active and on what time scale. In order to accomplish this goal the mission will determine the crustal  structure  of Venus,   the current activity  and  distribution  of  active  volcanoes  and   the movement of continental plates. The secondary objec­ tive is to further constrain the models of Venus' inter­ nal   structure   and   composition.   To   achieve   this,   the mission will investigate the size, state and composition of the core as well as the state and composition of the mantle. The proposed mission consists  of  an orbiter   in  a near­polar circular orbit  around Venus and a balloon for   in­situ  measurements  operating  during   the  initial phase   of   the   mission.   The   balloon   carries   a   neph­ elometer for measurements of aerosol composition, a magnetometer   for  detecting   the  existence  of  a  weak magnetic field below the ionosphere, a mass spectrom­ eter for measurements of gases present in the atmos­ phere   and   stereo   microphones   and   meteorological package for detecting acoustic  waves caused by tec­ tonic activity. The orbiter carries a gradiometer for de­ termining the gravity field, a synthetic aperture radar for investigating small changes in surface topography and mapping microwave signals from the surface and an IR and UV spectrometer and IR camera for moni­ toring  heat   signatures   from volcanoes.  By using   the previous landers as reference points it will also be pos­ sible   to   accurately  determine   the   spin   rate  with   the radar. The nominal mission duration is planned to be five years starting from the release of the balloon. The bal­ loon will operate for 25 days during which it oscillates vertically in the atmosphere between an altitude of 40 and 60 kilometres in a period of about six hours. At the same time,  due  to  prevailing  wind directions  on Venus,   it  will  gradually   spiral   from   the   equator   to­ wards   higher   latitudes.   During   the   balloon   science phase the orbiter will be in an elliptical orbit to max­ imise the time of visibility of the balloon with the or­ biter. After this phase, the orbiter will be brought into a  circular  orbit  at  an  altitude  of  250 kilometres.  To save fuel, apoapsis lowering will be achieved by aero­ breaking in Venus' atmosphere. In the presentation further details about the mission timeline   will   be   given.  Particular   engineering   prob­ lems such as thermal control and data communication and the proposed solutions will be presented. 