 MAVEN: Atmospheric loss induced by sputtering.  F. Leblanc 1, R. Lillis 2, S. Curry 2, J. Luhmann 2, R. Modolo 1, J.Y. Chaufray 1, X. Fang 3, J. Deighan 3, J. McFadden 2, J. Halekas 4, N. Schneider 3, P. Mahaffy 5, J. Connerney 5 and B. Jakosky 3. 1 LATMOS-CNRS, IPSL (UPMC, 4, place Jussieu, 75005 Paris France, francois.leblanc@latmos.ipsl.fr ), 2 UCB-SSL (Berkeley, CA, USA), 3 LASP (Boulder, CO, USA), 4 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa (Iowa City, Iowa 52242), 5 GSFC (Washington, MA, USA)   Introduction. To understand Mars' past atmospheric evolution is one of the main motivation of the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) Mission [1]. MAVEN was inserted around Mars in September 2014. Its set of instruments are now measuring the main characteristics of Mars' environment and upper atmosphere in order to reconstruct the main channels that could have lead to Mars atmospheric erosion along its history. Among these channels, the sputtering of Mars' atmosphere by accelerated planetary pickup ions is one of the possible mechanisms [2].  Several theoretical studies [3, 4] suggested that, even if sputtering is probably negligible at present solar conditions, it might have been much more efficient during the early phase of Mars' history. In this presentation, we will summarize our state of understanding and the observations of this phenomena.  Sputtering as a loss mechanism. [5] was the first to suggest that Mars' atmospheric sputtering by planetary accelerated ions might lead to a significant atmospheric erosion. Summarized by the sketch displayed in Figure 1, it has been estimated that beween 10 25 to 10 27 solar wind and planetary ions might impact Mars' thermosphere each second with energy up to four times the solar wind energy. Such impacting particles should induce a cascade of collisions in Mars' upper atmosphere leading to the ejection of atmospheric species. The efficiency of this mechanism has been modeled (see [2] for references) and might have contributed substantially to the erosion of Mars' atmosphere during the late Noachian and early Hesperian epochs and might have induced some of the isotopic fractionation [6] observed recently by Curiosity [7].  Figure 1: Carton of Mars' atmospheric sputtering   So far, no significant direct or related observations of this phenomena have been reported. During the last decade, Mars Express reported only a few observations of impacting particles [8] that could lead to atmospheric ejection by sputtering. The efficiency of impacting particles to eject atmospheric particles is traditionally expressed by a yield theoretically or experimentally estimated (Figure 2). Mars Express observations suggest an impacting flux close to the one simulated (Figure 2) but that this precipitation occurs much more sporadically than suggested by simulation. No direct observation of sputtering signatures was reported. The importance of sputtering at Mars remains therefore debated.  Figure 2: Simulated impacting flux by the hybrid magnetospheric model LatHys [9] for Ls=270°, quiet solar wind conditions and a spatial resolution of 50 km (black line). Yield energy distribution as calculated by [10] (red triangles). The green line represents the energy distribution of the ejected flux.  MAVEN observations. In contrast to Mars Express, MAVEN is specifically designed to directly observed the impacting flux thanks to several instruments, namely, STATIC an ion mass and energy spectrometer, SWIA an ion energy spectrometer, MAG a magnetometer and SWEA an electron spectrometer. MAVEN will reconstruct the impacting flux for various solar wind conditions, Mars' seasons and solar activity. STATIC will measure the ion mass and energy distributions around periapsis, as illustrated in Figure 3.    Figure 3: Simulated MAVEN ion energy distribution from LatHys [9] between 200 and 500 km in altitude for one expected MAVEN orbit.  A second set of instruments of MAVEN will be then used to look for signatures of sputtering in the upper atmosphere (NGIMS, an ion and neutral mass spectrometer) and in the exosphere (IUVS, a UV spectrometer).  MAVEN team specifically developed a set of magnetospheric, ionospheric/thermospheric, exospheric and test-particles models to identify and analyze sputtering signatures in Mars' environment, (see [2] for further details). These tools will be also used to reconstruct the past accumulated atmospheric loss induced by sputtering from MAVEN observations.   References:  [1] Jakosky B. et al. (2015) Space Science Review, Submitted. [2] Lillis R. et al. (2015) Space Science Review, Submitted. [3] Chaufray et al. (2007), JGR, 112, E9 [4] Wang et al. (2014) JGR, 119, 93. [5] Luhmann et al. (1991), JGR, 96, 5457. [6] Jakosky et al. (1994), Icarus, 111, 271. [7] Mahaffy et al. (2013), Science, 341, 263. [8] Hara et al. (2013), JGR, 118, 1. [9] Modolo et al. (2015), Plan. Space Sci., Submitted. [10] Johnson et al. (2000), JGR, 105, 1659. 