1379.PDF
MAVEN OBSERVATIONS OF THE MARTIAN MAGNETOSPHERE AND ITS RESPONSE TO SOLAR WIND DRIVERS.  J. S. Halekas1, D. L. Mitchell2, J. P. McFadden2, D. Larson2, J. E. P. Connerney3, J. Espley3, R. E. Ergun4, L. Andersson4, J. G. Luhmann2, R.J. Lillis2, D. A. Brain4, S. Ruhunusiri1, Y. Harada2, T. Hara2, S. Curry2, G. DiBraccio3, 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 (jasperhalekas@uiowa.edu), 2Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley CA 94720, 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, 4Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80303.    Introduction:  The MAVEN mission provides a comprehensive view of the Martian upper atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere. MAVEN carries the most complete aeronomy payload yet sent to Mars, and has an orbit designed to sample both the low-altitude ionosphere and the upstream solar wind, providing near-simultaneous measurements of solar energy inputs to the system, the reservoir of atmospheric gases, and the escaping particles. These measurements provide constraints not only on the structure and dynamics of (and escape from) the current system, but also their dependence on external drivers, allowing us to address the history of the loss of gas from Mars to space.  Background: Measurements by previous orbiters, including Phobos 2, Mars Global Surveyor, and Mars Express, have built our understanding of the Martian magnetosphere. The Martian magnetosphere is small compared to that of the Earth, and forms as a result of mass-loading and induced current systems in the ionosphere [1,2,3] rather than an intrinsic magnetic field (Mars does have strong localized remanent magnetic fields [4]). Escape from the Martian atmosphere follows many channels, including photochemical escape, Jeans escape, solar wind sputtering, and non-thermal ion escape processes [5]. Phobos 2 and Mars Express have measured and characterized many ion escape processes [6,7,8,9], albeit at higher altitudes than MAVEN will access at periapsis. Nonetheless, work remains to organize ion escape processes by the magnetic field orientation and determine how they depend on the energy inputs from the sun.  MAVEN Observations: The structure of the Martian magnetosphere through which escape takes place is controlled by ionospheric production by solar UV, the impact of solar wind plasma and energetic particles, the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), and the Martian phase (and thus the orientation of its remanent magnetic fields). As the MAVEN orbit precesses with time, we will sample all parts of this coupled system and determine its structure and dynamics (and escape from it) as a function of these parameters.  To make these measurements, MAVEN carries a comprehensive Particle and Fields package, consisting of a magnetometer (MAG), a Langmuir probe/waves instrument (LPW) which also houses the EUV sensor, two ion instruments (SWIA and STATIC), an electron instrument (SWEA), and an energetic particle instrument (SEP), which work in concert to measure plasma processes in the Martian environment.  The Solar Wind Ion Analyzer (SWIA) is designed to measure the solar wind plasma, both upstream from the Martian bow shock and inside the magnetosphere as it is mass-loaded, decelerated, and deflected around Figure 1: Martian magnetosphere observed under low solar wind dynamic pressure and +By IMF. Dashed lines indicate major boundaries and current sheets.  1379.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Mars’ ionosphere. SWIA produces two different kinds of 3-d distributions, coarse and fine, tailored respectively for the magnetosphere and the solar wind, as well as onboard-computed bulk moments.    Figs. 1 and 2 show SWIA coarse and fine energy spectra, together with MAG, STATIC, and SWEA data for context. Fig. 1 shows a typical orbit for low solar wind dynamic pressure and a +By IMF. For the current mission phase, MAVEN reaches its lowest altitude near the north geographic pole – therefore, given +By, periapsis lies in the +E hemisphere (that toward which the vxB convection electric field points). The orbit travels through the undisturbed solar wind, the sheath, a boundary layer, the draped tail lobes, a region of crustal magnetic fields and dense ionospheric plasma, and then back into the sheath and solar wind. The solar wind for this orbit has a proton density of ~2 cm-3, velocity of ~320 km/s, temperature of ~4 eV, and an alpha content of ~4%. This flow is shocked and heated by an order of magnitude in the sheath region. Between the sheath and the lobe, the –E flank of the magnetosphere contains highly mixed plasma, with evidence of significant instabilities in both the ion energy spectra and the magnetic fields, indicating the likely presence of Kelvin-Helmholtz and/or interchange instabilities. The tail lobe contains highly draped magnetic fields with a plasmasheet between them showing evidence of accelerated heavy ions, in agreement with previous observations [7,8]. The periapsis for this orbit, in the ionosphere, is dominated by crustal magnetic fields. At the outbound boundary between the ionosphere and the sheath, we see significant acceleration of heavy ions, indicating pickup and/or other acceleration processes.   Fig. 2 shows an orbit a day after that of Fig. 1, with moderate solar wind dynamic pressure and a  –By IMF (therefore, periapsis is in the -E hemisphere). The solar wind for this orbit is variable, with a proton density of ~5-20 cm-3, velocity of ~320-350 km/s, temperature of ~2 eV, and an alpha content of ~3%. As in the first orbit the flow is shocked and significantly heated and compressed in the sheath. Given the favorable orientation of the convection electric field, we observe an energetic plume of escaping pickup ions at high altitudes around apoapsis (circled portions of spectra in Fig. 2), accelerated outward by the penetration of this electric field. The inbound flank boundary appears rather different than in the previous case, with much less  evidence of mixing and instabilities. However, we still see evidence of significant ion acceleration at the plasmasheet, and at the outbound boundary, suggesting significant escape.    Conclusions: MAVEN has already observed a highly structured magnetosphere and ionosphere at Mars, clearly controlled in part by the solar wind and the interplanetary magnetic field. In the coming year, as our orbit covers more of the Martian system, MAVEN observations will allow us to determine how the structure and dynamics of the magnetosphere, and escape from it, depend on external drivers.   References: [1] Nagy A. F. et al. (2003) Space Sci. Rev., 111, 33-114. [2] Lundin R. et al. (1990) Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 873-876. [3] Mazelle C. et al. (2003) Space. Sci. Rev., 111, 115-181. [4] Acuña M. H. et al. (1998) Science, 279, 1676-1680. [5] Lammer H. et al. (2008) Space Sci. Rev., 139, 399-436. [6] Lundin R. et al. (1989) Nature, 341, 609. [7] Barabash S. et al. (2007) Science, 315, 501. [8] Fedorov A. et al. (2011) J. Geophys. Res., 116, A07220. [9] Dubinin E. et al., (2011) Space. Sci. Rev., 162, 173-211.   Figure 2: Martian magnetosophere observed under moderate solar wind dynamic pressure and    –By IMF. Energetic pickup ion populations are indicated by black circles.   1379.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
