1381.PDF
SOLAR WIND OR HOUDINI? PENETRATING PROTONS OBSERVED AT LOW ALTITUDE BY THE MAVEN SOLAR WIND ION ANALYZER.  J. S. Halekas1, J. P. McFadden2, J. G. Luhmann2, R.J. Lillis2, 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242 (jasper-halekas@uiowa.edu), 2Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley CA 94720.    Introduction: The solar wind is shocked, massloaded, decelerated, and deflected around Mars by its interaction with the Martian ionosphere [1,2]. While populations of ions of solar-wind origin have been observed at altitudes as low as ~270 km by Mars Express [3,4,5], indicating significant penetration of solar wind ions into the ionosphere, they typically no longer have the same velocity, density, or temperature as the initial upstream solar wind, since they have been heavily influenced by the complex electric and magnetic fields around Mars.  MAVEN Observations:  The Solar Wind Ion Analyzer (SWIA) instrument on the MAVEN mission, part of the Particle and Fields instrument suite, is designed to measure the flowing solar wind plasma, both upstream from the Martian bow shock, and inside the magnetosphere as it is decelerated and deflected around Mars' ionosphere. One of the first surprises of the MAVEN mission was the persistent observation by the SWIA instrument of a tenuous population of protons with solar wind energies traveling anti-sunward near periapsis, at altitudes of ~150-250 km, as seen in Fig. 1 at 22:25. This population is also seen by the STATIC instrument and confirmed to be protons by its time-of-flight measurement. While the penetration of solar wind protons to low altitude is not completely unexpected given previous Mars Express results, this population maintains exactly the same velocity as the solar wind observed upstream of the bow shock (albeit with a factor of ~500 lower density), for orbits when both populations are observed, as seen in Fig. 2. All changes in the energy and flux of the upstream population are also reflected by the population seen at periapsis, strongly suggesting a direct link between the solar wind and this population.  Even more unexpected is the fact that this signal actually increases in flux with decreasing altitude (see Figs. 1-2), rather than decreasing as any directly penetrating population should. The Role of Charge Exchange: Some fraction of the solar wind can interact with the distant corona of Mars, which extends well beyond the bow shock. By charge-exchanging with the neutral particles in this corona, some fraction of the incoming solar wind protons can gain an electron and become an energetic neutral hydrogen atom. Simulations suggest that this fraction is on the order of 1-3% [6,7]. Once neutral, these particles penetrate through the Martian magnetosphere with ease, with free access to the collisional atmosphere/ionosphere. Previously, the interaction of this population with the atmosphere has been investigated in terms of energy deposition (the expected energy deposition is on the order of ~1% of that due to extreme ultraviolet radiation [7]); however, as a result of reactions with the ionosphere and/or atmosphere, some of this penetrating energetic neutral hydrogen population can also shed an electron and regain its positive charge, once again becoming detectable by SWIA, and explaining its seemingly Houdini-like behavior. This chain of processes is illustrated schematically in Fig. 3.  Figure 2: MAVEN/SWIA ion spectra as a function of altitude on one orbit (different date from Fig. 1).  Figure 1: MAVEN/SWIA observations of penetrating solar wind protons at low altitudes above Mars. The partial density in the top panel is an integral over ions traveling anti-sunward with energies of 250-1000 eV.    1381.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
The slight dip in the penetrating proton density and hint of a population with a broader energy spread at the lowest altitudes in Fig. 1, at ~22:25, may reflect expected energy loss and/or backscattering resulting from the collisional interaction of the neutral and/or charged energetic hydrogen population with the dense ionosphere.  Implications: The penetrating population seen by SWIA can be used as a monitor of the solar wind, allowing MAVEN to remotely sense changes in the solar wind at the same time as it makes observations of ionospheric dynamics and atmospheric escape processes, and is thus of great importance for achieving top-level MAVEN science goals. The basic measurement gives us the solar wind velocity with no conversions needed, and in concert with modeling (to determine the total efficiencies of both conversion processes) should also allow us to remotely measure the solar wind density. Already, it gives us a rough measure of the solar wind density, since the 1/500 scale factor between upstream solar wind flux and penetrating flux at periapsis typically remains constant to within a factor of ~2.  Given a better understanding of the conversion efficiencies for energetic neutral hydrogen interacting with the ionosphere and atmosphere, it may also be possible to invert the measurement and determine the column of ionosphere sunward of the spacecraft, by looking at the ratio of penetrating flux to initial solar wind flux as a function of solar zenith angle and altitude. For instance, small variations such as those at around 22:15 may represent the effects of density waves in the ionosphere, which will change the column density with which the penetrating energetic neutral hydrogen atoms interact.     References: [1] Nagy A. F. et al. (2003) Space Sci. Rev., 111, 33-114. [2] Mazelle C. et al. (2003) Space. Sci. Rev., 111, 115-181. [3] Lundin R. et al. (2004) Science, 305, 1933-1936. [4] Dieval C et al. (2012) J. Geophys. Res., 117, A06222. [5] Dieval C et al. (2013) J. Geophys. Res., 118, 1972-1983. [6] Kallio E., Luhmann J. G., Barabash S. (1997) J. Geophys. Res., 102, 22183-22197. [7] Kallio E. and Barabash S. (2001) J. Geophys. Res., 106, 165-177.  Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the processes that may be responsible for the penetrating proton population observed near periapsis by MAVEN/SWIA (courtesy NASA/GSFC).  1381.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
