1388.PDF
  Figure 1. Total alkali vs. silica plot illustrating the range of glass compositions to be run in this study (black circles). Each composition will be run at three fO2s in order to provide composition-specific calibrations across the spectrum of geologically relevant compositions. These compositions were chosen from natural whole rock data to ensure geologically relevant calibrations. Data from [1] are shown for comparison (grey squares). PRELIMINARY CALIBRATION FOR MEASURING FERRIC IRON IN SILICATE GLASSES: A MÖSSBAUER AND X-RAY ABSORPTION SPECTROSCOPY STUDY. M. C. McCanta1, M. D. Dyar2, C. Carey3, S. Mahadevan3, A. Lanzirotti4, S. Sutton4. 1Dept. of Earth & Ocean Sciences, Tufts University, Medford MA 02155, molly.mccanta@tufts.edu, 2Dept. of Astronomy, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA 01075, 3School of Computer Science, University of Massachusetts, 140 Governors Dr. Amherst, MA 01003, 4Center for Advanced Radiation Sources (CARS), The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.   Introduction: Fe2+/Fe3+ ratios of volcanic materials on a planet reflect oxidation of the magma source region and additional effects of magma interaction with the near surface environment. Synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) enables measurement of Fe2+/Fe3+ ratios in situ at micro-scales on standard thin sections. Because melt composition and structure affect Fe3+/ΣFe, XAS measurements of unknowns require calibration standards with like compositions. To address this need, a suite of 33 synthetic glass standards covering a wide range of geologically-relevant compositions was created under four varying fO2 conditions. Results were used to develop a calibration to predict Fe3+/Fe in glasses with geological relevance. Oxidation States in the Solar System: Redox ratio measurements on a wide range of planetary materials show that broad fO2 variations exist throughout the solar system. Terrestrial magmas record oxygen fugacities that range over nine orders of magnitude. The emergence of oxygen and the evolution of planetary interiors are recorded in the redox states of multivalent elements locked in rocks, glasses, and minerals on planetary surfaces, if only technology is adequate to unlock them. For all these reasons, development of technology to analyze redox ratios at microscopic scales is of paramount importance. Experimental Methods: Runs were conducted in a 1-atm gas mixing furnace using the Pt (fO2 ≥ QFM) or Re (fO2 < QFM) wire-loop technique or Mo-foil inside evacuated Si-glass tubes (fO2 < QFM, highest SiO2 samples). Air, MH (CO2), QFM, and IW were used to equilibrate each composition, with fO2 values fixed by gas mixing or use of a solid buffer. Compositions were selected to be representative of a wide range of naturally-occurring glasses (Figure 1). Samples were then prepared for Mössbauer and XAS analyses. Mössbauer spectra were acquired in the Mineral Spectroscopy Lab at MHC under standard conditions, and “true” Fe3+ contents were determined from peak areas in those spectra. XAS data were acquired both at NSLS beamline X26A and at the GSECARS beamline (13-ID) at APS.  Multivariate prediction models were built from the Mössbauer and XAS results using the open-source machine learning Python library Scikit-learn [2], which was used to train and test partial least squares (projection to latent structures), Lasso (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator), and SVR (support vector regression) models. Scikit-learn uses the open-source applications LIBLINEAR [3] and LIBSVM [4] for its linear and polynomial SVR models, respectively.  Multivariate Models: Both PLS and lasso are fundamentally based on the familiar expression for multiple linear regression, which is of the form:  Y = 0 + 1X1 + 2X2 + ... + nXn where Y is the %Fe3+, 0 is the regression coefficient for the intercept and the i values are regression coefficients for predictor variables 1 through n. In XAS, there are many predictor variables, which are the input X values (i.e., matrix of intensity values at each of 6144 channels representing wavelength) and relatively few samples (rows of X matrix).  PLS is a specialized form of principal components analysis in which the regression equation is shrunken by creating hybrid channels that are linear combinations of original channels. Multi-dimensional space is projected onto a smaller vector space using the variance of X and the relationship between the predictor 1388.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
 Figure 2. Comparison of %Fe3+ values predicted by the lasso model with no self-absorption correction and edge-step normalization to a mid-point of the post-edge. The best fit linear regression to all of the data has an R2 of 0.992 with a root mean square prediction error of 2.8. Blue data points were acquired at the NSLS at Brookhaven National Laboratory and red points at the APS in Chicago. Best-fit lines calculated separately for each location show no significant differences between data from the two synchrotrons.  Figure 3. Selected spectra plotted with lasso coefficients represented as red dots – these are the 200 channels chosen by the lasso model.  Magnitudes are indicated by the distance from zero on the right axis.  and response variables. PLS creates a new matrix in the smaller vector space of dimension k and uses it for regression. Directions in that new vector space are ortho-normal, removing collinearity that inhibits ordinary least squares regression on the original X matrix.  Alternatively, lasso regression shrinks this expression by reducing the number of terms implicitly. It does not use projection, but instead constrains values of the correlation coefficients ( values) in a multiple linear regression (equation above) using the original data matrix X. The absolute value of the sum of the  values is constrained to be less than some boundary value t (the lasso’s model parameter, analogous to k, the number of dimensions in the smaller PLS vector space). The model weighs the importance of each channel to the prediction; unimportant channels are driven to  values = 0 by the optimization process.  PLS uses every channel of data, even those that are noisy and may have an adverse effect on the results. The lasso removes channels that are judged to be less informative, omitting them from the regression equation altogether in an iterative process. The lasso is thus more robust against noise than PLS, and produces a sparser model (fewer non-zero coefficients). Results: We compared results from two different multivariate techniques (PLS and the lasso) and four different methods of data pre-processing: correcting for self-absorption (SA) or not, and using edge-step normalization to a mid-point of the post-edge vs. to the last few points in the tail of the spectrum (Figure 2). Significance tests show that results of all four treatments for each technique are indistinguishable but the Lasso provides significantly better results than PLS (Table 1). The resultant optimal errors on %Fe3+ are ±2.9, which is comparable to the errors associated with Mössbauer measurements of %Fe3+. Results also show that there is much more useful predictive information in the main edge portion of these spectra than in the pre-edge (Figure 3).  Table 1. Comparison of Results  Lasso PLS Treatment RMSE R2  RMSE R2 SA Mid 3.371 0.989 0.000307 9.361 0.918 SA Tail 2.894 0.992 0.000229 9.337 0.918 No SA Mid 2.822 0.992 0.000215 9.186 0.921 No SA Tail 2.845 0.992 0.000219 9.167 0.921 Implications: This work conclusively demonstrates the usefulness of multivariate analyses in interpreting XAS data. Work is in progress to expand this calibration to an even wider range of compositions, and to create universal software for prediction of Fe3+ in silicate glasses at synchrotrons around the world. This project will enable accurate characterization of glasses at scales as small as 1 m in extraterrestrial materials. Acknowledgments: This research was supported by NSF grants EAR-1219761 and EAR-1219850 and the Remote, In Situ, and Synchrotron Studies for Science and Exploration node of the NASA SSERVI program. References: [1] Cottrell E. et al. (2009)  Chem. Geol., 268, 167-179. [2] Pedregosa  F. et al. (2011) J. Machine Learning Res., 12 , 2825-2830. [3] Fan R. et al. (2008) J. Machine Learning Res., 9, 1871-1874. [4] Chang C. and Lin C. (2011) ACM Trans. Intel. Systems Techn., 2, 27.   1388.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
