 MODELING THE PHOBOS AND DEIMOS NEUTRAL GAS TORI: IMPLICATIONS FOR DETECTION BY MAVEN  A. R. Poppe1,2, S. M. Curry1, S. Fatemi1,2, J. P. McFadden1, and G. T. Delory1,2 1Space Sciences Laboratory, Univ. of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720 (poppe@ssl.berkeley.edu), 2NASA Solar System Exploration Research Virtual Institute, NASA ARC, Mountain View, CA  Introduction: Previous observations have suggested that Phobos and Deimos generate neutral gas tori along their respective orbits around Mars, either from direct outgassing (later ruled out), micrometeoroid bombardment, or sputtering from solar wind and planetary ions [e.g., 1-4]. The dominant neutral species expected to be present in the torus are reflective of the Phobos and Deimos surface compositions, including O, Na, Al, Si, Mg, and Fe. While O will be difficult to distinguish from the Martian planetary corona, the other species are not expected to be present in the Martian atmosphere and thus serve as unique "tracer species" for the tori. To date, however, no definitive detection of the Phobos or Deimos neutral tori has been made despite several attempts [i.e., 5]. Here, we describe a modeling effort to predict both the neutral and ionized components of the Phobos and Deimos tori. We use a combination of several models, including a Monte Carlo model for the neutral tori, a plasma hybrid model for the background electric and magnetic fields near Mars, and a pick-up ion tracing model for investigating the fluxes of ionized tori neutrals. We also discuss the possibility of detection and characterization of the torus pick-up ions by the MAVEN spacecraft, which recently entered orbit around Mars.  Neutral Monte Carlo model: The neutral MC torus model follows the dynamical evolution of neutral atoms ejected from the surfaces of Phobos and Deimos into near-Martian space under the influence of gravity from Mars alone. Neutrals are ejected from Phobos and Deimos with velocity distributions specific to the ejection mechanisms (i.e., a Sigmund-Thomson for sputtered neutrals and a T=3000 K Maxwellian for micrometeoroid bombardment). As time evolves in the simulation, neutrals are weighted according to their respective photo-ionization lifetimes (which span several orders-of-magnitude for the relevant torus species). Two- and three-dimensional equilibrium neutral density maps can be constructed from the model for each species and in turn, used as source locations for the generation of torus pick-up ions. For example, Figure 1 shows planar and vertical cuts of the relative density of neutral Fe atoms sputtered from the surface of Phobos by solar wind charged particles. These neutral atoms diffuse away from Phobos (located at x=2.7, y=0 RM) to form a tenuous neutral torus around Mars.  Martian hybrid plasma model: The hybrid plasma model tracks the behavior of fluid electrons and particle ions as they interact with Mars. The model is built from an existing hybrid model that has been successfully applied to the Moon, Callisto, and Rhea [6]. The hybrid model provides electric and magnetic field vectors in near-Mars space (including the solar wind, magnetosheath, and magnetotail) for use in tracing neutral torus pick-up ions. Figure 2 shows preliminary Figure 1: The (a) planar and (b) vertical density distribution of neutral Fe atoms sputtered from Phobos (located at x=2.7, y=0 RM), in the Phobos-rotational frame.  Mars	   Phobos	   results for the normalized magnetic field magnitude (left) and plasma density (right) from the hybrid model for standard solar wind conditions: Parker spiral IMF, solar wind velocity of 400 km/sec, solar wind density of 4 cc-1. Averaged electric and magnetic field vectors throughout near-Mars space will be modeled for a range of pertinent solar wind conditions and provided to the pick-up ion tracing model.  Pick-up ion tracing model: We will use an established pick-up ion tracing model [7,8] in order to determine the flux and distribution of pick-up ions generated from neutrals in the Phobos and Deimos tori.  Using the neutral distributions obtained from the Monte Carlo model for each specific neutral species and the background electric and magnetic fields in near-Mars space from the plasma hybrid model, the pick-up ion tracing model launches billions of test particles and traces their evolution through the Martian system. Virtual sensors can be placed throughout the simulation domain to record to density, flux, and energy spectra of each ion species. Based on a previous study [4], we expect torus pick-up ions to exist both outside the Martian magnetosphere in the solar wind as well as within the Martian magnetosheath and magnetotail.  Implications for MAVEN: The Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN mission (MAVEN) arrived in orbit around Mars in mid-2014 and has been observing the Martian ionosphere and magnetosphere. MAVEN carries a full suite of plasma and field instrumentation [9], including the Suprathermal and Thermal Ion Composition (STATIC) experiment, which is an ion mass composition spectrometer capable of resolving ion mass and energy [10]. While much of STATIC's measurements are focused on the dynamics and escape of Martian planetary ions, it may be possible for STATIC to observe heavy pick-up ions from the Phobos and Deimos tori given favorable orbital geometry, observing mode and geometry, and solar wind/IMF conditions. Using the pick-up ion modeling results, we will predict the most favorable locations and solar wind/IMF conditions for potentially observing torus pick-up ions.   References:   [1] Bogdanov, A.V. (1981) J. Geophys. Res., 86 [2] Reidler, W., et al., (1989), Nature, 341, 604-7 [3] Sauer, K., et al. (1995), Science, 269, 1075-8 [4] Poppe, A. R. and S. M. Curry (2014) Geophys. Res. Lett., 41 [5] Oieroset, M., et al. (2010), Icarus, 206, 189-198 [6] Holmstrom, M., et al. (2012) Earth Planets Space, 64, 237-245 [7] Curry, S. M., et al. (2013), J. Geophys. Res.: Space Physics, 118, 554-569 [8] Curry, S. M., et al., (2014) J. Geophys. Res.: Space Physics, 119, 2328-2344 [9] Jakosky, B., et al., (2013) Space Sci. Rev. [10] McFadden, J. P., et al., (2013), Space Sci. Rev.   Figure 1: The normalized magnetic field magnitude (left) and normalized total plasma density (right) from the hybrid model. 