1435.PDF
PDS ANALYST'S NOTEBOOK FOR MSL AND ADDITION OF CONTEXT MOSAICS.  T. C. Stein1,, R. E. Arvidson2, and F. Zhou3,  1Washington University in St. Louis, 1 Brookings Drive, CB 1169, St. Louis, MO 63130, tstein@wustl.edu, 2arvidson@wustl.edu, 3chow@wunder.wustl.edu.  Introduction: The PDS Analyst's Notebook (AN) (http://an.rsl.wustl.edu) [1] provides access to science information from several of NASA's landed missions: Mars Science Laboratory [2], Mars Exploration Rover (MER) [3], Mars Phoenix Lander [4], LCROSS, and Lunar Apollo surface mission data archives. The AN enriches data archives by integrating sequence information, engineering and science data, observation planning and targeting, and documentation into web-accessible pages to facilitate "mission replay". In this paper, we focus on the MSL AN and highlight the addition of context mosaics as a value-added component. Populating the Notebook: The MSL AN contains data, documentation, and support files that are incorporated on a daily basis into the science team's version of the Notebook. This approach assists with data validation and builds on strong collaboration between data producers and PDS archivists that begins soon after mission selection with creation of the project data management and archive plans. The public version of the MSL AN is comprised of peer-reviewed, released data and is updated coincident with PDS data releases as defined in mission archive plans. All data and documents have been ITAR cleared. Data. The MSL AN contains archives from all science instruments. The data are provided by the instrument teams and are supported by documentation describing data format, content, and calibration. Documents. The MSL AN also contains data set documentation and sol (i.e., Mars day) documents. The sol documents are the mission manager and documentarian reports that provide a view into science operations—insight into why and how particular observations were made. The reports have not been edited except for grammar and spelling, and to remove spacecraft and instrument sensitive materials. Science Plans. Observation planning and targeting information is extracted from each of MSL's science plans and presented in both timeline and list form. This information includes instrument settings such as filters used and sensors selected, as well as observation parameters such as distance to target. Effort has been made to link source commands with resulting data products, albeit with limits due to the absence of round trip data tracking. Navigating through the Notebook: A number of methods allow user access the AN contents. Mission Summaries. A searchable and sortable summary table provides an overview of surface operations by sol. Links enable quick access to details for a given sol. Sol Summaries. The Sol Summaries are the primary interface to integrated data and documents contained within the MSL AN (Fig. 1). Data, documents, planned observations, and mosaics are grouped for easy scanning. Detailed information is displayed as items are selected by the user. Data products are displayed in order of acquisition, and are grouped into logical sequences, such as a series of image data. Sequences and the individual products that comprise them may be viewed in detail and downloaded, either directly or as part of a cart order. Detail data product views vary by instrument. PDS labels, data set documents, and activity details are available for all products. In some cases, derived data also are available. Image data are presented in both browse and full-resolution versions. Maps. The MSL rover traverse is plotted on a HiRISE basemap using the raw and corrected drive telemetry provided by the project. Users may zoom and pan the map. Clicking on a traverse location brings up links to corresponding data. Searching. Data products may be searched by time (sol, spacecraft clock time, and UTC date), location (rover-specific site and position), instrument, command sequence, product type, image eye and filter, and product ID. Sol documents may be searched by type, time, and filename. In addition, free text searches are supported. Results are displayed based on user settings, and searches can be bookmarked for later recall. Online Help. Guidance is provided through a series of searchable help pages. Topics include release notes, landing site, coordinate frame, instruments, data processing, and data product file naming and structure. Context Mosaics: The PDS data archive for MSL includes mosaics generated by the science team from Navcam data. However, sometimes sequences of single frame images are acquired for the purpose of creating a mosaic without a formal data product being archived. For these cases, we have created mosaics from the single frame images to provide context, and have included them in the MSL AN. Context mosaics, which are not calibrated science products, are created from Navcam, Mastcam and MAHLI images using Microsoft Image Composite Editor (ICE) software in either perspective or simple horizontal cylindrical projection (Fig. 2). Navcam context mosaics are created by stitching radiometrically calibrated images and then applying a linear 2% stretch. 1435.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Mastcam and MAHLI context mosaics use DRCL products as sources. Projection information for the context mosaics is available in the EXIF data that are part of the embedded JPG file header with each mosaic. Whereas the archive mosaics are created from a priori knowledge of the camera models and pointing information, Microsoft ICE uses well-understood techniques to reverse engineer the camera model and panorama geometry based on feature matching results when comparing source images [5][6][7]. It is not unusual to see minor errors in some of the mosaics (both archive and context) because of the large field of view of source images and the mosaics. Most mismatches occur at distances relatively close to the camera. Through the first 707 sols of released MSL data, 1396 context mosaics have been created (240 Navcam, 40 MAHLI, and 1126 Mastcam). Context mosaics are accessed from the home page of the Notebook and are also integrated into the Sol summaries and data search functions. A built-in mosaic viewer provides pan and zoom support, especially useful with larger mosaics. Future Development: A number of Notebook functions are based on previous user suggestions, and feedback continues to be sought. (User feedback should be submitted to an@wunder.wustl.edu or by using the online form.) Work continues to incorporate additional features, especially in the areas of related observations and visualization, as well as data transformation. Acknowledgement: The Analyst's Notebook is developed through funding provided by the Planetary Data System Geosciences Node. Ongoing cooperation of the MSL science and operations team is greatly appreciated. The Analyst's Notebook is available at http://an.rsl.wustl.edu. References: [1] Stein, T.C. et al. (2010), LPS XLI, Abstract #1414. [2] Grotzinger, J. et al.  (2012)  Space Science Reviews, 170, 5-56. [3] J.A. Crisp, et al. (2003) doi:10.1029. [4] Arvidson, R.E. (2008) Jet Propulsion Laboratory Document D-29392. [5] Zhang, Z. (1998) Microsoft Technical Report MSR-TR-98-71. [6] Brown, M. et al. (2003) ICCV Vol. 3.  [7] A. Efros (2001) CMU Computational Photography.    Fig. 1. Example MSL Analyst's Notebook Sol Summaries web page.   Fig. 2. Mastcam context mosaic generated from 102 single frame images acquired on sol 590. Size is 18,435 x 6412 pixels. 1435.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
