1508.PDF
OVERVIEW OF IMPACT-GENERATED HYDROTHERMAL ACTIVITY AT THE WEST CLEARWATER LAKE IMPACT STRUCTURE, CANADA.  M. C. Kerrigan*1, and G. R. Osinski1,2, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration & Dept. of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (*mkerrig@uwo.ca) 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.  Introduction:  The West Clearwater Lake impact structure is located in Tursujuq National Park in the Nunavik region of Northern Quebec, Canada (56°10 N, 74°20 W). The lake is approximately 32 km in diameter and has an inner ring of islands 16 km in diameter representing the eroded remnants of the central uplift [1]. Recent determinations suggest that the West and East Clearwater impact structures represent two impact events separated by ~180 million years [2]; previous studies hypothesized that these twin craters formed in a single event dated at ~290 Mya [3]. The regional geology for this impact structure includes Precambrian granitic gneiss, granodiorite, and quartz monzodiorite of the Canadian Shield with cross cutting diabase dykes. Blocks of Ordovician limestone also occur in the impact melt rocks on the central uplift islands [4]. While secondary mineralization has previously been identified at West Clearwater [e.g., 5-7] no study has focused on the hydrothermal system of this impact structure. This paper will provide an overview of the distribution and nature of the impact-generated hydrothermal deposits and alteration identified in the field at West Clearwater impact structure. Impact-generated Hydrothermal Activity:  Evidence for impact-generated hydrothermal activity is recognized at over 70 of the ~180 craters on Earth [8] and while few of these have been studied in detail some patterns do emerge in the distribution and nature of hydrothermal activity at impact craters. Osinski et al. [8] provided a review of impact-generated hydrothermal activity and proposed that there are six main locations of an impact crater where hydrothermal deposits can form. Due to the eroded state of West Clearwater structure, settings such as the crater rim and ejecta deposits are not preserved but the ring of islands in the centre of the lake provide access to the central uplift and crater-fill impact melt rocks and melt-bearing breccias where evidence of impact-generated hydrothermal activity is expected to be, and indeed was found. Field Campaign:  Fieldwork was conducted in August and September 2014 as part of a Canadian-USUK expedition (see [9] for an overview of this expedition and other ongoing studies). Extensive geologic mapping and sampling was carried out, concentrated on the islands in the lake with some sampling conducted on the lake shoreline. There are abundant outcrops of impactites on all the central uplift islands with many cliff sections displaying large vertical sequences of impact lithologies. The main impact lithologies identified were fractured basement, monomict lithic breccia, impact melt-bearing lithic breccia, clast-rich finegrained impact melt rock, clast-poor fine-grained impact melt rock, clast-poor medium-grained impact melt rock [9]. Evidence for hydrothermal activity was identified within each of these lithologies and on all of the islands. The locations of hydrothermal samples collected can be seen in Figure 1. An overview of the variety of hydrothermal deposits identified at West Clearwater is as follows: Vugs and Veins within impact melt rocks.  By far the most common hydrothermal deposits found in the field were quartz-filled vugs and veins (Fig. 2) within the impact melt rocks, most abundant in the clast-rich and clast-poor fine-grained impact melt rocks. Several ~10 cm diameter vugs were found in situ and larger, up to ~50 cm diameter, quartz vugs were found eroded out into scree piles. Many of these vugs have large well formed quartz crystals growing from the interior rims to the centre of the cavities. Less common were much smaller vugs, or infilled vesicles, and thin veins of calcite, also typically found in the fine-grained impact melt rocks. Sulphide Alteration within uplifted basement rocks.  One outcrop of concentrated sulphide alteration (Fig. 3) was found within basement rocks on Cloudberry island in the centre of the lake. This outcrop was ~1 x 0.5 m in size and was the only outcrop of this nature found at West Clearwater. Some ~1 mm sized pyritic crystals were identified in cavities at the top of the outcrop and yellow/orange fibrous Fe-oxide is seen covering the surface of the outcrop. Concentrated Alteration Zones.  At two particular outcrops within the clast-poor fine-grained impact melt rock on Ile Lepage and Ile Atkinson there are ~2-5 m sized concentrated zones that are highly vesicular. Vesicles from ~1 mm to ~5 cm diameter of circular to irregular shape were filled with quartz, calcite, and clay minerals. At the outcrop on Ile Lepage (the northernmost island) the impact melt rock has an overall colour of dark red while at Ile Atkinson (the southernmost island) the outcrop has an overall light grey colour. The amygdales at both outcrops, however, have pink, red, and dark purple coloured "haloes" from their rims up to twice the diameter of the amygdale at the centre (Fig. 4). The differences in colour between the impact 1508.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Fig. 1: The West Clearwater impact structure (lake diameter ~32 km) with locations of hydrothermal samples collected marked with the yellow pins. Fig. 2: Field photo of a quartz-filled vug in the impact melt rock at the West Clearwater impact structure. Fig. 4: Highly vesicular zones within the impact melt rock on Ile Lepage (left) and Ile Atkinson (right). Vesicles display alteration haloes of colours ranging from pale pink to dark purple.  Fig. 3: Sulphide alteration within the target rocks of the central uplift. melt rocks and the localized zones around the filled vesicles might represent different episodes of alteration. Pervasive Alteration within impact melt rocks.  A striking overall characteristic of the impact melt rocks at the West Clearwater impact structure is the vibrant red colouration that the majority of the impact meltbearing impactites display. While we have yet to conclude the cause of this colouration it is thought that pervasive Fe hydrothermal alteration of the melt rocks is probable.  Drill Core:  In addition to samples that have been collected in the field, drill cores from both West and East Clearwater Lake have been made available for this project from the Earth Materials Collection, Natural Resources Canada in Ottawa. The core drilling program was carried out at Clearwater Lake in 1963-1964 resulting in four cores through the central uplift of West Clearwater and two from East Clearwater. Preliminary results from the East Clearwater cores identified hydrothermal activity within the impact melt sheet of that crater [10]. Work has also begun on the cores from West Clearwater with evidence of hydrothermal activity identified. Combining the data from the field samples collected across the width of the central uplift with the information from the drill cores on the alteration and mineralization with depth will allow us to produce a 3D picture of the impact-generated hydrothermal system at the West Clearwater impact structure. Summary and Future Work:  In this study we have identified for the first time the various forms of impact-generated hydrothermal mineralization and alteration found at the West Clearwater impact structure. Mineralization in discrete vugs and concentrated zones of vesicles, occurs within the impact melt rocks which also display a pervasive yet heterogeneous alteration. Further detailed geochemical and fluid inclusion studies will be carried out on the hydrothermal samples to characterize the possible origin and evolution of the hydrothermal system generated by the impact at this site. References: [1] Dence, M. R., et al., (1965) Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, 59, 13. [2] Schmieder, M., et al., (2015) Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 148, 304-324. [3] Reimold W. U., et al., (1981) Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 76(1), 73-76. [4] Simonds, C. H., et al., (1978). In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 9, pp. 2633-2693).  [5] Phinney, W. C., et al., (1978) In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 9, pp. 2659-2694). [6] Palme, H., et al., (1979) In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 10, pp. 2465-2492). [7] Allen, C. C., et al., (1982) Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 87(B12), 10083-10101. [8] Osinski, G. R., et al., (2013) Icarus 224.2 347-363. [9] Osinski, G. R., et al., (2015) LPSC 46 this meeting [10] Kerrigan, M. C., et al., (2015) LPSC 46 this meeting  Acknowledgments:  Special thanks to the rest of the WCIS14 expedition team A. Brunner, B. A. Cohen, A. B. Coulter, R. Elphic, A. Horne, D. S. Lim, R. Misener, A. Rae, D. Saint-Jacques, J. R. Skok, S. Squyres, R. Wilks, and K. E. Young for their help in finding and collecting the samples for this project. 1508.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
