1521.PDF
HYDROTHERMAL MINERALIZATION WITHIN THE IMPACT MELT SHEET OF THE EAST CLEARWATER LAKE IMPACT STRUCTURE, CANADA.  M. C. Kerrigan*1, G. R. Osinski1, and R. A. F. Grieve1. 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, N6A 5B7 (*mkerrig@uwo.ca)   Introduction:  The ~22 km diameter East Clearwater Lake impact structure is located in northern Quebec, Canada (56°05 N, 74°07 W) ~125 km east of Hudson Bay. Together with West Clearwater Lake crater it has been thought of as a rare example of a double impact structure formed in a single event dated at ~290 Mya [1]; although recent dating has reevaluated East Clearwater to have been formed at ~470 Ma [2]. Bathymetric data show that East Clearwater Lake has a central uplift although unlike West Clearwater, it is completely submerged [3]. The target lithologies include Precambrian granitic gneiss, granodiorite, and quartz monzodiorite of the Canadian Shield with some cross cutting diabase dikes [3]. Evidence for hydrothermal alteration and mineralization have previously been noted at West and East Clearwater [e.g., 4, 5, 6] but have not been examined closely. This study aims to characterize the hydrothermal mineralization in the impact melt sheet of East Clearwater Lake impact structure. Impact-generated Hydrothermal Systems:  Hydrothermal systems are environments where a fluid (i.e., water) interacts with a heat source. Evidence for hydrothermal activity induced by impact events has been documented at over 70 terrestrial impact craters yet few of these systems have been studied in detail [7]. Unlike geothermal and volcanic activity which may have a limited timespan on some planets, impact cratering is a universal and ongoing process throughout the solar system. Studying hydrothermal systems in terrestrial craters will allow us to better understand the dynamics of these systems, their origin and evolution over time and will further aid in the search for, and explanation of areas of hydrothermally affected areas in craters on Mars and other planetary bodies.  Methodology:  As the entire crater is currently submerged, the only impactites from East Clearwater available to study are from two drill cores obtained in the 1960s, one (1-64) from the central uplift that goes through basement gneisses and one (2-63) from just east of the central uplift which penetrates the impact melt sheet [6]. The samples used in this study are from a section of the melt sheet from core 2-63.  Core 2-63 goes through ~140 m of post impact sediments and extends through ~45 m of impact melt rock without reaching the bottom of the melt sheet. At this point the core was angled approximately 30° from the vertical and drilling was abandoned. The depths referred to here represent the true vertical depth of the samples. Some of the top of the impact melt sheet is missing due to poor core recovery but from the top of the available sequence at 270 m to 297 m depth 12 samples were taken as regularly as core availability would allow. These samples were prepared as thin sections and examined using an optical microscope with additional mineral/textural identification carried out on an electron microprobe. Results:  Near the top of the sample sequence, between ~274 and 280 m the melt rock is highly vesicular. This zone is 10–25% vesicles with some forming large cavities up to 2 cm in length (most of the large vesicles are elongated with an irregular outline). Below 280 m vesicles are <10% and they mostly die out at 284 m. After this vesicular zone to the end of the core the rock is a fine-grained dark grey melt rock with 1015% clasts of granitic or gabbroic composition, which become less common with depth. Alteration is not common in the melt rock as a whole and is restricted to the edges of feldspar crystals and minor patches of intergranular clay minerals [8]. These clay minerals as analysed by [8] are indicative of Fe-chlorite. Cavity filling mineralization.  The majority of the vesicles are either filled or have a thin mineral coating on their interiors. Many of the larger cavities, abundant at the top of the melt, do not show any obvious mineral growth in hand sample; however, under microanalysis some minor quartz growth in particular is nearly always present at cavity rims (Fig. 1). Quartz is the most abundant cavity filling mineral. It occurs in various forms; drusy rose quartz lining the interior of vugs, spherulite clusters extending into empty cavities, and particularly at depth 286.4 m, quartz fragments with augite and orthoclase rims. Calcite begins to appear as large well developed crystals from a depth of 275.8 m where it fills some small cavities in the vesicular zone but is more common at depths greater than 295 m. It is often present intergrown with quartz (Fig. 2) and lining the walls of fractures. Fluorite was identified in rare instances, often in association with titanite which is common in the lower half of the sequence. Zircon and monazite are common throughout the sequence and one instance of cassiterite was identified at a depth of 279 m. Oxide and sulphide mineralization.  Various oxides and sulphide minerals were identified throughout the sequence with notable variations in type, abundance, 1521.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
and form with depth. For example, with all the sulphides crystal sizes decrease and distribution becomes more regular throughout the sample with depth. Closer to the top of the sequence (270–279 m) sulphide crystals are larger, often clustered, and occur more at vug rims than in the matrix (Fig. 3). The variations with depth in the types of oxides and sulphides that occur are less obvious. Illmenite, galena, and millerite are common throughout the sequence; whereas minerals such as magnetite and hematite are more commonly seen at greater depth. Sphalerite and chalcopyrite were identified closer to the middle of the sequence. Discussion: The typical sequence for an impactgenerated hydrothermal system begins with an early stage of vapour dominated silicate mineralization, followed by vapour-to-liquid dominated silicate mineralization, and a late stage of liquid dominated carbonate – sulphide/iron oxyhydrate mineralization [7]. The presence of the highly vesicular zone at the top of the impact melt sheet with cavities filled primarily by quartz mineralization suggests the action of a condensing vapour. First suggested by [6], it is possible that this vapour became trapped by the already crystallized top of the impact melt sheet and created this concentrated zone of vesicules and large cavities dominated by quartz mineralization. This zone is also enriched in sulphide mineralization with galena, millerite, and sphalerite forming along vug rims suggesting that the liquid stage was sulphur rich. The three stages of hydrothermal activity as outlined above can be thought of spatially as well as temporally, in this case with the top of the melt sequence dominated by the products of the early stage, the middle intermediate and lower in the sequence dominated by the later stage mineralisation of calcite and iron oxides.  Further investigation of this sequence from the melt sheet of East Clearwater will be carried out including XRD and fluid inclusion analysis to better characterise the nature of the hydrothermal environment at this site. This will also form part of a larger overall comparative study with the investigation of the hydrothermal system at the West Clearwater impact structure [9].  References: [1] Reimold W. U., et al., (1981) Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 76(1), 73-76. [2] Schmieder, M., et al., (2015) Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 148, 304-324. [3] Dence, M. R., et al., (1965) Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada, 59, 13. [4] Phinney, W. C., et al., (1978) In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 9, pp. 2659-2694). [5] Simonds, C. H., et al., (1978). In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 9, pp. 2633-2693). [6] Palme, H., et al., (1979) In LPSC Proceedings (Vol. 10, pp. 24652492). [7] Osinski, G. R., et al., (2013) Icarus 224.2 347363. [8] Allen, C. C., et al., (1982) Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 87(B12), 10083-10101. [9] Kerrigan, M. C., et al (2015) LPSC this meeting    Fig. 3 Sample 947 (270 m depth) Illmenite grain with galena and surrounded by an augite rim. I: Illmenite G: Galena M: Millerite P: Plagioclase K: K-feldspar A: Augite Fig. 1 Sample 965 (275.8 m depth) Vug with quartz growth on rim. Q: Quartz A: Apatite I: Illmenite Z: Zircon M: Millerite Fig. 2 Sample 980 (279.8 m depth) Quartz and calcite intergrowth with pyrite in centre void. Q: Quartz C: Calcite Py: Pyrite 1521.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
