1526.PDF
POWERED BY STEAM: EXPLORING SMALL BODIES IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM.  C.J. Runyon1, C. Hall1, D. Hurd2, J. Allen1, 1Geology & Environmental Geosciences, College of Charleston, Charleston, SC, 29424 runyonc@cofc.edu, 2Edinboro University, Edinboro, PA.   Introduction:  To prepare students for a highly visual and tactile workforce, it is imperative that today’s classrooms keep up with instructional and informational technologies that are the media of modern life. Engaging students with authentic data sets, real world questions and investigations through a variety of learning strategies offers students and teachers a seamless and coordinated curriculum that is immediately usable in most classrooms across America, particularly those serving at-risk Title I populations.   Our SSERVI Education/Public Engagement (EPE) program is part of two SSERVI teams (SEEED at Brown/MIT1 and CLASS at University of Central Florida2). The program and activities promote science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics (STEAM) literacy using the excitement generated from the success of recent missions and the SSERVI team research. The planned activities and materials highlight not just science, engineering, math, and technology but also how they may be infused with the arts. Examples include, but are not limited to, artistic drawings of the features and changing ‘faces’ or phases of the moon and morphologic interpretations based on solar incidence angle, and compositional variation.  Initial Steps:  In Fall 2014, our SSERVI EPE team worked with lead teachers and artists from around the nation to develop arts-infused STEM curricula and tactile graphics for incorporation into an educator’s guide and upcoming professional development opportunities for formal, informal/out of school, and exceptional audiences. We worked with musicians, visual artists, theatre artists, storytellers/creative writers, and dancers. STEM content includes the origin and evolution of the moon and small bodies in our solar system. The content correlates with both the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and English Language Arts/Visual Arts standards. Examples of items shared at the initial teacher and artist training are:  NASA science and exploration initiatives. Scientists from the SEEED and CLASS SSERVI teams presented information on the science and engineering goals and objectives as well as detailed information on the relevance of this research to NASA’s overarching mission to better understand the nature and origin of moons and small bodies in our solar system.    The importance of art and writing to problem solving and critical thinking skills. Participants were actively involved in developing a story framework, visual representations of the characters within the story, and music for the scenes and transitions in the story. The culminating artistic representation of cataclysm and moon formation was presented at the SC State Museum’s International Observe the Moon Night event for the general public.     The need to be proactive in making all materials accessible for ALL learners. Among the participants at the initial training were people with hearing impairments, visual impairments, and mobility impairments. Their insight is critical for fully comprehending the needs of these audiences and ensuring that all materials developed through this effort meet those needs.    NGSS Framework. One of the developers of the NGSS presented on the three-dimensional learning framework and shared ideas for incorporating sciFigure 2: Sharing cataclysimic moon formation story with the public and young audience members drawing their own representation of the story. Figure 3: Generating accessible models in real-time for use with multiple audiences. Example of Olympus Mons on Mars and orbits of moons   Phobos and Deimos. moons.  Figure 1: CLASS scientist describing the nature of asteroids to educators and artists. 1526.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
ence and engineering practices, crosscutting concepts, and core disciplinary content into existing and new activities.   Current and Upcoming:  Throughout this year, the team is working virtually to develop a gap analysis of NASA and other space science activities that meet the SSERVI initiatives and that are, or could be made, accessible. Further, existing activities are being assessed as to whether or not they meet the NGSS 3dimensional learning framework. During Summer 2015, the team will hold a workshop, with an emphasis on formal educators of middleschool science, ELA, and visual arts, to provide content training, curriculum training, and the technical tools/instruments used within the curriculum. Educator participants will be provided ample opportunities to discuss ideas and develop content for new curricula. Ultimately the SEEED and CLASS SSERVI EPE program will provide participants real-world, inquiry- and problem-based, standards-aligned activities tied to the scientific process, digital and visual arts, and with extensive connections to NASA and the SSERVI science teams. Catching the Wave: Through SSERVI, the tactile book, Catching the Wave: A Tactile Introduction to Spectroscopy, is being generated to allow persons who are blind/visually impaired to experience the excitement of solar system exploration through spectroscopy. The book provides and introduction to the electromagnetic spectrum via accessible text descriptions and tactile graphics. A second tactile book will also be generated to introduce the nature and origin of small bodies in our solar system.  Figure 4: Student who is blind explores variations in mineralogy of the Moon via tactile graphics of spectra. Online Educator Guide: The culmination of four professional development opportunities will result in a fully vetted Educators Guide that includes SSERVI content and a lessons learned/best practices framework. The guide will include an array of activities and lessons to help educators and students understand how NASA is currently exploring the Moon, Phobos, Diemos, and small bodies. The guide will integrate NASA maps and data into student-cetnered interactive lessons, bringing the excitement of scientific exploration and discovery into the classroom. This resource will build upon the M3 Educator’s guide, which includes eight activites written at the upper middle school – high school level, Exploring the Moon, Meteorite Mysteries, and the NASA education sample disks. Through the edcuator guide, the SEEED and CLASS SSERVI effort will share best pedagogical, instructional, and learning practices to develop experience-based education programs for 21st Century learning environments. On-line Learning Resources: Utilizing educational activities from SSERVI and other NASA missions, we are offering courses for both graduate and undergraduate students with general and topical planetary science themes as a part of their program. These courses will include curriculum and activities built around the science teams’ research foci and publications. In addition, the SEEED and CLASS SSERVI EPE team are modifying an existing online course in lunar geology for pre-college teachers of science who wish to learn more about the exciting advances in lunar and planetary science. Educator courses are offered through Montana State University’s National Teacher Enhancement Network, a distance learning network created explicitly for science educators. References: [1] Pieters et al. (2014), Planetary & Space Science 102, pp. 144-151.  [2] Britt (2014), SSERVI-2014-213.  [3] Runyon et al., (2012), LPSC 2012.  1526.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
