1532.PDF
THE GEOMORPHOLOGY OF COMET 67P: IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PAST COLLISIONAL EVOLUTION AND FORMATION. S. Marchi1, H. Rickman2, M. Massironi3, F. Marzari3, M. R. El-Maari4, S. Besse5,  N. Thomas4, C. Barbieri3, M. A. Barucci6, S. Fornasier6, L. Giacomini3, H. U. Keller7, E. Kuehrt8,  P. Lamy9, M. Lazzarin3, S. Mottola8, G. Naletto3, M. Pajola3, H. Sierks10; 1Southwest Research Institute (marchi@boulder.swri.edu), 2Uppsala University,  3Padova University,  4University of Bern,  5ESA Villanueva and Noordwijk,  6Observatoire de Paris, 7Institute for Geophysics Braunschweig, 8DLR Berlin, 9LAM Marseille, 10MPS Goettingen.Introduction: Images  acquired  by  the  OSIRIS camera system on board Rosetta revealed comet 67P Churyumov-Gerasimenko  complex  surface.  Several distinct morphological  units have been identified and mapped (Fig. 1; [1]). These units are characterized by the presence of i) smooth terrains (presumably covered by  particles  smaller  than OSIRIS resolution,  even  at the highest resolution of ~10 cm/pixel);  ii) large pits (possibly  related  to  outgassing);  and  iii)  seemingly competent  materials  (presumably  organic-rich  as  revealed by the VIRTIS spectrometer [2]).Figure 1: Main geomorphological units mapped on 67P [1]. The large and small lobes are refereed to as the  body and  head,  respectively.  The connecting  region is refereed to as the neck. Some of these features, e.g. pits and smooth terrains, were also observed on other comets visited at close  range  [3,4].  However,  their  interpretation  remains for the most part speculative due to the lack of extensive coverage and insufficient spatial resolution. Both  aspects  are  considerably  improved  by  OSIRIS imaging. As a result, processes such as airfall deposition and sculpting of fine-grained deposits have been clearly  detected  [1].  These  features  are  some of  the footprints of cometary activity on 67P's surface.In addition, a number of intriguing features, such as extensive layering and fracturing, may reveal bulk properties of the nucleus, rather than due to surface  processes  and  cometary  activity.  These  features are  important  because may complement  observations of other instruments (such as the CONSERT radar [5]), and ultimately provide constraints on the nucleus internal  structure.  The overall  shape  of  the two lobes of 67P also provides an important constraint on the bulk structure.  All  together,  these  features  bear  important implications for the origin of 67P. Here we present a first analysis of some of the key features that could provide constraints on the internal structure of 67P, and discuss their implications for its origin  in  the  framework  of  most  recent  models  of cometesimal formation and their subsequent evolution.Layers  and  Fractures: Layers  are  observed  in various locations on 67P. Some of them may be entirely due to surface processes, such as sublimation lag deposits.  In  one  region  (Seth;  Fig.  2),  however,  lineaments are seen in the dust-free walls of large pits. Figure 2: The region highlighted in blue (Seth) is characterized by the presence of many large pits. Most of them exhibit lineaments in their walls and have flat floors, some of which are indicated by green lines.These lineaments seem to be parallel to the floors of these pits, which are remarkably flat. A likely interpretation is that the lineaments on the walls are expression of internal layering, as well as the pits' floors. Intriguingly, the 3D orientations of these layers (derived using a high resolution shape model) can be followed through the body and appear to be aligned with a characteristic  ridge  (topographic  high)  seen  on  the  other side of the body. Unless a mere coincidence, this observation may indicate that the putative layers consti1532.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
tute a well-defined and organized structure that extend for a significant volume of the body.The  head  (and  particularly  the  large  cliff  named Hathor; Fig. 3) also shows a characteristic set of lineaments that may have a similar nature,  however their extension  cannot  be  traced  through  the  head  due  to lack of coverage (the relevant regions are currently in shadow  and  would  become  visible  closer  to perihelion).Figure 3: A close-in view of Hathor region. Red lines  indicate  fractures,  green  lines  indicate  layers, while orange lines indicate the presence of distinct sets of fractures/lineaments that may indicate the presence of two additional bodies (see text). The Hathor region is also characterized by an impressive set of fractures that run for hundreds of meters from the base of the head (the neck) to its summit (Fig. 3; see also [6] for a comprehensive analysis of 67P's  fractures).  These  fractures  are  several  meters wide and deep. The terrain on the Hapi region on the neck (at the head's base; Fig. 1) contains smooth and bouldery materials. The latter could be due to erosion of Hathor and, perhaps, related to the formation of the fractures. The estimated volume of the fractures, however, is far exceeding that of the exposed boulders at the base. Unless boulders erode on a time scale much faster  than  fractures  growth,  it  seems  unlikely  that these fractures are uniquely due to erosional processes.Moreover, a 3D analysis of the orientations of the fractures  suggests  they  may  penetrate  deep  into  the head. Support to this conclusion comes from the observation that a large, 1 km-across depression at the summit of the head. Whether this depression is the result of a collapse or an outburst, its rhombic shape indicates the presence of  planes of  weakness within the head, which appear to be aligned with the Hathor's fractures system. It is therefore possible that these fractures are indeed structural features.Implication for 67P's internal structure: The observations above,  although still  preliminary,  open up an interesting perspective  to the internal  structure of 67P. First, the two lobes seem to have rather district internal  properties.  The larger  body  exhibits  internal layering, while the head is characterized by an impressive set of fractures, along with an orthogonal set of layers. Furthermore, the orientations of the sets of layers are not compatible with them being expression of a unique set of layers. The simplest explanation of these observations is that the head and the body are two distinct  objects that  merged.  Support  to this conclusion arrives  also  by  the  observation  that  the  neck  region shows evidence  for  the  presence  of  additional  small bodies,  perhaps formed as result  of  the collision between the head and the body (Fig. 3).It is also possible that 67P characteristic shape is the result of localized erosion that would have carved the original body into a two lobes shape. While erosion can certainly have played a role in shaping the current 67P [7],  it  does not simply explain the cross-cutting presence of layering and fracturing.If the above inferences on the internal structure of 67P are correct, then we can interpret them in terms of implications  for  other  Rosetta  instruments.  For  instance,  an  internal  structure  characterized  by  layers and fractures offers multiple planes of reflection, potentially  detectable  by  the  CONSERT  radio  experiment.  Furthermore,  if  the lobes are  two independent objects it is possible that the head and the body could have distinct compositions, even if a similar composition does not rule out the two objects hypothesis.     Preliminary conclusions:  The presence of internal  layers  and  extensive  fracturing,  if  confirmed, has vast implications for 67P origin. First, the formation  of  deep  fractures  likely  requires  an  energetic process, such as a collision. The same is true for the presence of additional fragments in the neck region.Collisions can take place at various stages during the lifetime of a comet. They may be part of the formation  process  in  the  trans-neptunian  primordial  disk, provided the surface density of cometesimal were high enough, or may be part  of the subsequent collisional evolution  within  the  scattered  disk,  the  most  likely reservoir of Jupiter family comets. Further work is required to be able to disentangle which of the two possible  pathways  is  more  compatible  with  the  current 67P, but the game is afoot.References: [1] Thomas et al.  (2015)  Science,  in press. [2] Capaccioni et al. (2015) Science, in press. [3] Thomas et al. (2013) Icarus 222, 453–466. [4] Britt et al. (2004) Icarus 167, 45–53. [5] Kofman et al. (2014) AGU Fall meeting, Abstract #P34B-01. [6] El-Maari et al.,  this  meeting.  [7]  Lamy et  al.  (2014)  AGU Fall  meeting, Abstract #P41C-3937.1532.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
