1538.PDF
TITAN'S MAGIC ISLAND: TRANSIENT FEATURES IN A TITAN SEA.  J. D. Hofgartner*1, A. G. Hayes1, J. I. Lunine1, H. Zebker2, B. W. Stiles3, C. Sotin3, J. W. Barnes4, E. P. Turtle5, K. H. Baines3, B. H. Brown6, B. J. Buratti3, R. N. Clark7, P. Encrenaz8, R. D. Kirk9, A. Le Gall10, R. M. Lopes3, R. D. Lorenz5, M. J. Malaska3, K. L. Mitchell3, P. D. Nicholson1, P. Paillou11, J. Radebaugh12, S. D. Wall3, C. Wood13, *Presenting author (jhofgartner@astro.cornell.edu), 1Cornell University, Ithaca NY, 2Stanford University, Stanford CA, 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena CA, 4University of Idaho, Moscow ID, 5JHU Applied Physics Lab, Laurel MD, 6University of Arizona, Tucson AZ, 7USGS Denver Federal Center, Denver CO, 8Observatoire de Paris, Paris France, 9USGS Astrogeology Center, Flagstaff AZ, 10LATMOS-UVSQ, Paris France, 11University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux France, 12Brigham Young University, Provo UT, 13 Planetary Science Institute, Tucson AZ.   Introduction:  Transient bright features, popularly referred to as Titan's Magic Island, were observed in Titan's northern sea, Ligeia Mare, in the Cassini T92 and T104 observations in July 2013 and August 2014 (Fig. 1) [1].  Multiple images obtained prior to the T92 detection and between the T92 and T104 detections do not include these bright features (Fig. 1).  The features are inconsistent with image artifacts and permanent structures and thus are transient.  Ephemeral phenomena most consistent with the observations are waves, floating/suspended solids and bubbles.  Additional bright anomalies that are likely also transient features were observed in Ligeia Mare and Kraken Mare during the T104 observation.  Titan's northern hemisphere is transitioning toward the summer season and the timing of the onset of these transients suggests that they are an expression of the changing seasons.  The region of the Magic Island will be observed again on January 11th, 2015 (T108).   Backscatter Analysis:  For a permanent geophysical structure on Titan, the angle of incidence is the dominant parameter that determines its brightness (normalized radar cross-section; NRCS) in Cassini Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images.  The angle of incidence and NRCS for a general surface are inversely related; the NRCS is greater for smaller incidence angles.  All of the major solid terrain classes on Titan have been shown to have an NRCS-incidence behavior that is consistent with quasi-specular models [2]. To test if detection of the transient features is determined simply by the incidence angle we compared the observations to a suite of quasi-specular models (Fig. 2). We find that these models can be ruled out with greater than 88% confidence, indicating that the observations are inconsistent with a permanent structure. Dynamic Phenomena:  The evolution of the features appears to have included a reversion between the T92 and T104 observations and thus is inconsistent with the formation of a new permanent structure such as an island via cryovolcanism. Variations in absorption of the radar energy due to changing sea level is unlikely to explain the transients because the absorption of the radar as it propagates through Ligeia Mare   Figure 1: Eight Cassini observations of the region of Titan's Magic Island.  In the T92 and T104 images, transient bright features (circled in red) are observed at 78O N, 123O E that are not seen in any of the other images.   is constrained to be small [3].  Exposure of solid surface due to liquid-level retreat, as was observed for some southern hemisphere lakes during southern summer [4], remains a plausible explanation.  We do not favor this explanation however because of the T93 non-detection just 16 days after the T92 detection and lack of evidence for liquid retreat elsewhere in the sea.  The T92 detection and the T64, T91, T93, and T95 non-detections all occurred at approximately the same true orbital anomaly.  Tides due to Titan's eccentric 1538.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
orbit around Saturn should result in consistent behavior at a particular true anomaly and thus are unlikely to explain the transients.  The remaining transient hypotheses include waves, suspended/floating solids and bubbles.  All of these hypotheses have plausible mechanisms by which they could commence or become enhanced due to the approach of northern summer.  Local meteorology could also stimulate or enhance these phenomena but we are unable to constrain its role in the appearance of these transients.   Figure 2: The normalized radar cross-section of the region of the transient features as a function of incidence angle.  Quasi-specular models for permanent geophysical structures are inconsistent with the observations indicating that the features are indeed transient.                         Future Observations and Modeling:  On January 11th, 2015 the region of the transient features will be observed at an incidence angle of approximately 10 degrees.  The seasonal behavior suggests that additional transients will be discovered during this observation.  Detailed modeling of the radar backscattering for the remaining transient hypotheses is the next stage of the analysis and may provide additional insight into the nature of these enigmatic features. Acknowledgements:  Jason Hofgartner gratefully acknowledges the Cassini RADAR and VIMS teams for the data and opportunity to lead the analysis and the Cassini Project and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Post Graduate Scholarship Program for financial support. References:  [1] Hofgartner J. et al., (2014) Nature Geosci. 7, 493. [2] Wye L. (2011) Radar Scattering from Titan and Saturn's Icy Satellites Using the Cassini Spacecraft. [3] Mastroguiseppe M. et al., (2014) Geophys. Res. Lett. 41, 1432. [4] Hayes A. et al., (2011) Icarus 211, 655. 1538.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
