 WAS GANYMEDE RESURFACED TECTONICALLY OR CRYOVOLCANICALLY? THE EFFECT OF INITIAL TOPOGRAPHY ON SIMULATIONS OF GROOVE FORMATION. M. T. Bland1 and W. B. McKinnon2, 1U. S. G. S., Astrogeology Science Center, Flagstaff, AZ (mbland@usgs.gov), 2Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences and McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences, Washington University in Saint Louis, MO.    Summary: The swaths of parallel, periodicallyspaced, tectonic ridges and troughs that constitute Ganymede's grooved terrain disrupt and completely erase or replace both preexisting heavily cratered terrain and older ridge sets. Current spacecraft data has not resolved whether the observed resurfacing requires a stage of cryovolcanic flooding before ridge and groove formation [e.g., 1], or whether tectonics alone is capable of resurfacing broad expanses of the satellite [e.g., 2]. Recent numerical simulations of lithospheric extension have succeeded in reproducing many characteristics of the grooved terrain at reasonable strains, but used low-amplitude, semi-random preexisting topography-implicitly assuming some resurfacing occurred before the ridge-forming tectonics [3]. Here we extend these  simulations to explore the effects of large-amplitude preexisting topography on groove terrain formation, providing a test of the tectonic resurfacing hypothesis. We find that when preexisting topography exceeds 25-50 m in amplitude, the resulting deformation shows a marked decrease in periodicity. Our preliminary results suggest some form of cryovolcanism or topographic relaxation may be necessary before periodic ridges can form.    Background: Ganymede's groove terrain consists of numerous lanes of ridges and troughs tens of km wide and hundreds of km long. Within each lane, the ridges are periodically spaced with wavelengths of 317 km, and amplitudes of several hundred meters [see ref. 4 for a review]. The formation of the grooved terrain, which almost certainly involved lithospheric extension, has resurfaced both the preexisting cratered terrain, and preexisting groove lanes. That is, younger groove lanes crosscut and completely disrupt or replace older groove lanes. The post-Voyager conception of groove formation included extensive cryovolcanism before the formation of periodic ridges, in part to explain the observed resurfacing [1]. However, the general lack of cryovolcanic source vents in higher resolution Galileo images, and clear evidence for tectonic imbrication of preexisting bright terrain led to the idea that tectonics alone may have resurfaced Ganymede [2, 5]. The ubiquity of subtle tectonic features in regions that appeared smooth at lower resolution is also consistent with tectonic resurfacing, but both cryovolcanic and band formation interpretations of these relatively smooth regions have been offered [6, 7, 8]. The role of cryovolcanism (broadly defined to include band formation) therefore remains unclear. Here we use numerical simulations of groove terrain formation to elucidate the relative importance of cryovolcanic and tectonic resurfacing during groove formation.  Modeling Approach: Our recent finite element simulations of groove terrain formation via lithospheric extension have successfully reproduced the periodicity, wavelengths, and amplitudes of the grooved terrain [3]. The model is viscoelastic-plastic and utilizes all relevant viscous flow mechanisms for ice I [e.g., 9]. Brittle deformation is modeled with a nonassociated plastic flow law and Drucker-Prager yield criterion (nominal cohesion of 1 MPa). We examined heat fluxes (q) of 75-150 mW m-2, total extensional strain of 10%, strain rates of 10-13-10-14 s-1, and surface temperatures (Ts) of 70-120 K. Our nominal Cartesian domain was 80x24 km. To systematically evaluate whether extension can resurface preexisting largeamplitude topography, we generated initial semirandom topography by randomly phase shifting and co-adding 80 sinusoids of different wavelengths. This topography was normalized to have a specific maximum relief (i.e., difference between highest and lowest points) ranging from 1 m (very smooth) to 200 m.  Additionally, we extracted topographic profiles from Ganymede's dark terrain (stereo-controlled photoclinometry from Marius Regio) for use as the initial topography. The maximum relief of the dark terrain data was ~300 m.  Fig. 1: Surface deformation after 10% extension for 7 simulations (Ts=100 K, q=100 mWm-2, 1 mm grain size) that used initial topo. with the same form (top panel) but different maximum relief: (from top to bottom) 1 m (dark blue), 10 m, 25 m (light blue), 50 m, 100 m (green), 150 m, 200 m (red). Curves were given an arbitrary vertical offset for clarity.  Results: The effect that initial topography has on groove formation is shown in Fig. 1. When the initial relief is ≤ 25 m, the resulting deformation is strongly periodic, similar to Ganymede's archetypal grooves (e.g., Bubastis Sulcus). However, as the initial relief increases, the resulting deformation becomes dominated by several large-amplitude, isolated troughs. Figure 2 shows the power spectrum for four of the simulations shown in Fig. 1 (plus the initial topography). Whereas the spectrum remains peaked in every case (in contrast to that of the initial topography), the peaks are quite broad when large-amplitude initial topography was used (full width half max., FWHM ~ 10 km). Spectral analyses of Ganymede's grooves suggest narrower wavelength distributions within a groove set (FWHM ~ 2-5 km) [10,11] (although it is unclear whether these are typical or best cases, and we note that some isolated troughs are observed within the grooved terrain). The isolated troughs may be similar to those observed in Ganymede's dark terrain (e.g., Nicholson Regio). These preliminary simulations suggest tectonic resurfacing alone cannot have resurfaced Ganymede.  Figure 2: Power spectrum of the initial topography, scaled for 200m relief (black) and four of the surface traces shown in Fig. 1. Colors correspond to those in Fig. 1. Dark Terrain: Figure 3 shows the final surface deformation from simulations that used the same initial topography extracted from Marius Regio (non-furrow topography possibly similar to that which predated groove formation). The periodicity of the deformation depends on the heat flux and surface temperature. Warm Ts and higher q result in more periodic deformation (at least in this case), whereas lower Ts and q result in more localized deformation. Both lower Ts and lower q result in greater amplification rates [3], which here lead to stronger localization within one or two isolated troughs. Extension appears to have amplified the along-track periodicity already present in the preexisting terrain. Thus whereas amplification is weaker in the simulations with higher Ts and q, in these cases it is sufficient to enhance the modest preexisting periodicity found in the dark terrain without leading to isolated, large-amplude troughs. Whether such a mechanism can operate in 3D will be evaluated in the future. Conclusions and Future Work: Our simulations suggest that resurfacing Ganymede's bright terrain by tectonic disruption alone may be difficult, as simulations of groove terrain formation that start with topographic relief exceeding 50 m in amplitude tend to result in a few isolated troughs rather than periodic structures. This suggests resurfacing occurred before the tectonic deformation that formed the ridges and troughs. Alternatively, a subtle preexisting tectonic fabric (i.e., lending some preexisting periodicity) coupled with high heat fluxes may have been sufficient to induce periodic structures through tectonics alone. Additional 2D (and eventually 3D) simulations of groove formation in the presence of realistic initial topography will help clarify whether such "pure" tectonic resurfacing remains viable.  Figure 3: Surface deformation after 10% extension for five simulations that each used initial topography derived from Ganymede's dark terrain (top panel), but different surface temperature (Ts) and heat flux (q): Ts=120 K, q=100 mW m-2 (purple), Ts=100 K, q=150 mW m-2 (blue), Ts=100 K, q=100 mW m-2 (green), Ts=100 K, q=70 mW m-2 (orange), Ts=70 K, q=100 mW m-2 (red). Curves have been given an arbitrary vertical offset for clarity. Acknowledgments: Paul Schenk provided topography. This work is supported by NASA OPRP. References: [1] Parmentier E. M. et al. (1982) Nature, 295, 290-293. [2] Head, J. W. et al. (1997) LPSC XXVIII, 535-536. [3] Bland M. T. and McKinnon W. B. (2015) Icarus, 245, 247-262. [4] Pappalardo R. T. et al. (2004) In: Bagenal, F. et al. (Eds) Jupiter, Cambridge Univ. Press. 363396. [5] Pappalardo et al. (1998) Icarus 135, 276-302. [6] Schenk P. M. et al. (2001) Nature, 410, 57-60. [7] Head et al. (2002) GRL 29, 2151. [8] McKinnon W. B. et al. (2014) GSA Ann. Meet., #259-5. [9] Durham W. B. et al. (2001) Ann. Rev. Earth. Planet. Sci., 29, 295-330. [10] Grimm R. E. and Squyres S. W. (1985) JGR, 90, 2013-2021. [11] Patel J. G. et al. (1999) JGR, 104, 24057-24074.  