1568.PDF
PHOTOCHEMICAL ESCAPE OF OXYGEN FROM THE MARTIAN ATMOSPHERE: FIRST RESULTS FROM MAVEN R. J. Lillis1, J. Deighan2, J L. Fox3, S.W. Bougher4, Y. Lee4, M. Combi4, F. Leblanc5, T. E. Cravens6,  A. Rahmati6, B. M. Jakosky2 1UC Berkeley Space Sciences Laboratory (rlillis@ssl.Berkeley.edu), 2Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado Boulder, 3Department of Physics, Wright State University, 4Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Sciences, University of Michigan, 5Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique, Jussieu, Paris 6Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Kansas.  Introduction: One of the primary goals of the MAVEN mission is to characterize rates of atmospheric escape at the present epoch and relate those escape rates to solar drivers.  One of the major escape processes is known as photochemical escape, which is broadly defined as a process by which a) an exothermic reaction in the atmosphere results in an upwardtraveling neutral particle whose velocity exceeds planetary escape velocity and b) the particle is not prevented from escaping through any subsequent collisions.  At Mars, photochemical escape of oxygen is expected to be a significant channel for atmospheric escape, particularly in the early solar system when extreme ultraviolet (EUV) fluxes were much higher.  Thus characterizing  this escape process is central to understanding the role escape to space has played in Mars' climate evolution [1, 2]. Current understanding: Because escaping hot atoms cannot easily be directly measured, models of production and transport (through the atmosphere) of such atoms must be used to constrain escape rates.  These models require altitude profiles of neutral densities and electron and ion densities and temperatures, as well as compositional information.  All prior escape rate estimates to this point have been based on the two dayside Viking Lander descent profiles of ions and neutrals [3, 4], despite the electron temperature data being limited to above 200 km [5].   Calculating instantaneous escape fluxes. It is expected that MAVEN measurements will revolutionize our understanding of this important loss process.  All the relevant quantities upon which photochemical escape depends will be measured at the relevant altitudes (150-250 km).  LPW will measure electron density and temperature, NGIMS will measure neutral and ion density and STATIC will measure ion density and temperature.  4 separate calculations must be made for every altitude profile: 1. Profiles of O2+ dissociative recombination (DR) rates will be calculated straightforwardly from electron temperature, electron density and O2+ density.  2. Profiles of rotational and vibrational distributions of O2+ ions will be calculated from profiles of CO2, O, O2, O+, CO2+ and CO+ via a lookup table from an empirical model. 3. Profiles of energy distributions of hot O atoms will be calculated from the results of step 2 and from profiles of electron and ion temperatures. 4. Profiles of all neutral densities will be input into models of hot O transport in order to calculate photochemical escape fluxes from DR of O2+.  Figure 1 shows how photochemical escape fluxes will be derived from MAVEN data. We will present photochemical escape fluxes from the November 2014 to March 2015 first 5 months of the MAVEN mission, when periapsis is in the northern hemisphere, at solar zenith angles ranging from 50° to 150°. Looking Forward to the rest of the MAVEN mission:  As the mission progresses, we expect to characterize the photochemical escape as a function of all relevant factors, in particular solar zenith angle and EUV flux. The latter will change with solar activity, solar rotation and Mars heliocentric distance, while MAVEN will sample the former from 0 to 150 degrees as the periapsis location precesses over the primary mission.   This, combined with further simulations with progressively higher EUV fluxes, will allow us to make a total integrated loss estimate over the course of Martian history and hence a determination of the impact of this loss process on the evolution of the Martian climate.  References: [1] McElroy et al., JGR, 1977, [2] Fox and Hac, Icarus, 2009, [3] Nier and McElroy, JGR, 1977, [4] Chen et al., JGR, 1978, [5] Hanson and Mantas, JGR, 1988.  1568.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  Figure 1:  Example of how photochemical escape fluxes will be derived.  "Mock data" altitude profiles of quantities from a predicted MAVEN trajectory for November 4, 2014, are shown in the top row and quantities relating to the resulting photochemical escape derived are shown in the bottom row.  Panel a) shows cold neutral densities with major species in color, panel b) shows electron and ion densities with major species in color. Panel c) shows neutral, ion and electron temperatures. Panel d) shows the escape probability for a 3eV atom produced as part of isotropic distribution.  Panel e) shows the calculated energy distribution of hot O atoms created by DR of O2+. Panel f) shows the O2+ DR rate and the production rate of atoms which escape.   1568.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
