1631.PDF
SPACE-WEATHERING FEATURES ON TWO HAYABUSA PARTICLES R. C. Ogliore1 and E. Dobrica˘2,1Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai'i at Ma¯noa, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA(ogliore@higp.hawaii.edu), 2Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,NM 87131, USA.IntroductionJAXA's Hayabusa mission collected surface regolithsamples from the S-type asteroid Itokawa and returnedthem to Earth for laboratory study. These particlesshow signatures of space weathering (changes in theoptical and physical properties of the surface of anairless planetary body) through micrometeorite impactand energetic-particle irradiation. Microcraters, shocklamellae, and splash features that were formed by micrometeorite collisions can be found on the surfaces ofregolith grains from Itokawa, although previous studies (e.g. [1]) found that they are rare compared tolunar regolith. Solar-wind produced nanophase Feand radiation-damaged rims on the surfaces of Itokawagrains imply that space weathering due to solar windirradiation is significant [2]. Small circular surface features or "blisters" on Itokawa grains provide evidenceof solar-wind irradiation [3] on timescales of hundredsto tens of thousands of years (e.g. [4]). The lowsurface gravity of asteroid Itokawa (∼10−4 m/s2, [5])compared to the Moon (1.6 m/s2) may cause micrometeorite impact residue to be distributed over a largerarea. Evidence for this effect on the surfaces of Itokawagrains could include: 1) very thin splash melt residue,2) impact-ejected grains from the target (Itokawa) thattraveled far from the impact site, and 3) efficient regolithgardening (from impacts and electrostatics).We analyzed the surfaces of two Itokawa grains to investigate the nature of solar-wind blisters, splash-meltresidues, and small adhering grains.MethodsWe analyzed two Itokawa particles: RB-DQ04-0062(which we named "Naoko") and RB-DQ04-0091("Mizuki"). Both particles were irregularly shaped,with a long dimension of ∼40 µm, and were composedmainly of olivine and plagioclase (as determined byinitial SEM-EDS measurements). We transferred bothparticles from their JAXA shipping containers to analuminum SEM stub coated in Post-It note glue usinga Sutter micromanipulator and tungsten needle. A thincoat of carbon (∼5 nm) was applied for conductivity.Traditional secondary electron microscopy, even using a low accelerating voltage, has difficulty resolvingvery small and shallow features. The Zeiss Helium IonMicroscope (HIM) at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory uses a primary He+ beam (30 keV) to generatesecondary electrons at the sample's surface without acontribution from backscattered electrons. This microscope has a very large depth of field, small beam size(<0.1 nm), excellent spatial resolution (<0.4 nm), andextreme surface sensitivity, making it ideally suited forimaging small, shallow surface features.Adhering surface grains were prepared for TEM analysis using the focused ion beam (FIB) technique with aFEI Quanta 3D Dualbeam FIB instrument at the University of New Mexico. Bright and dark-field TEM imagesand quantitative EDS X-ray analyses were carried outat 200 kV on UNM's JEOL 2010F FEG TEM/ScanningTEM (STEM).ResultsFigure 1: HIM secondary electron images of splash meltfeatures on two Itokawa particles. B and C are fromNaoko, A and D are from Mizuki. Scale bars are 1 µm.Splash melt residue: We observed splash residue onboth Itokawa particles. Large splashes (several µm wideand ∼200 nm thick) were clearly visible on both particles (Figure 1-C). Thin, smaller splash features (Figure 1-B) were common but heterogeneously distributed,as were pancake (Figure 1-A) and droplet melt feautres(Figure 1-D) smaller than 1 µm.We extracted a thin section from the large splash meltfeature on Naoko (Figure 1-C) by FIB for TEM analysis. The splash melt was vesiculated and amorphous,and had variable elemental composition. The adhering1631.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
grain on the splash melt (Figure 1-C, top) is amorphousand Ca- and Al-rich. The underlying large grain is Fa25olivine. The splash melt varies in chemical composition between Fa25 and the composition of the adheringCa-, Al-rich adhering grain. We propose that a micrometeorite impacted Itokawa and hit a Ca-, Al-rich silicate(e.g. anorthite) and launched liquid melt >40 µm away(possibly much farther) where it splashed onto this Fa25grain. The top layer of the Fa25 melted and the wholearea quenched, forming this feature.Figure 2: A (Mizuki) & B (Naoko): HIM secondaryelectron images of two agglutinate-like adhering particles. C & D (both Naoko): Dark-field TEM images oftwo adhering particles. Scale bars are 0.5 µm.Adhering grains: The surfaces of both Itokawa grainswere decorated with adhering grains, most less than 1µm in size. We tried removing one with a tungsten needle in the FIB, but the needle bent when pushed into thegrain, implying the grain was strongly attached. We removed two grains with agglutinate-like textures (Figure2-A and 2-B) by FIB and analyzed them by TEM. Theywere found to be amorphous SiO2, with the smallergrain on Naoko enriched in Fe and Mg closer to thecontact with the underlying Fa25. We propose that thesetwo grains formed during a micrometeorite impact; thesmaller grain landed on its host grain while still partiallymolten. Other adhering grains, such as the chromitewith 8.5 wt. % Al2O3 shown in Figure 2-D, have nodiscernible gap between the grain and the underlyingmineral and are consistent with the mineralogy of LLchondrites. These grains are lithic fragments, and areobviously firmly attached. The grain shown in Figure 2D is olivine with a similar chemical composition as theunderlying mineral (Fa25) but there is a discernible gap.Also, this grain shows obvious shock features, implyingit was excavated during a micrometeorite impact from asurface with similar mineralogy, possibly nearby. However, we did not see any clear impact craters on eitherMizuki or Naoko.Figure 3: HIM secondary electron images of a SWblistered surface on Naoko (A) and a non-blistered surface on Mizuki (B). Scale bars are 1 µm.Blisters: We saw severe blistering on some faces (Figure 3-A), and moderate blistering or no blistering at all(Figure 3-B) on others. A highly blistered area couldbe found very close to a non-blistered area. We sawblistering covering areas of a conchoidal fracture (Figure 3-A), implying that area was exposed to the solarwind for thousands of years after the fracture. In highlyblistered areas, we occasionally saw open/burst blisters(Figure 3-A). The variability in blistering on these particles implies that Itokawa regolith grains fractured onthe timescale of blister formation, which is thousandsof years.ConclusionsOur observations show that both micrometeorite impacts and solar wind irradiation modify the surfacesof Itokawa regolith grains. Splash-melt features,agglutinate-like adhering particles, and shocked grainsall provide evidence that the surfaces of Itokawa particles were modified by micrometeorite impacts. Thesefeatures differ significantly from analogous features inlunar regolith samples, likely due to Itokawa's smallersize and lower gravity. Blistering due to solar windirradiation is both widespread and variable on smallspatial scales.References: [1] E. Nakamura, et al. (2012) P Natl AcadSci 109(11):E624. [2] T. Noguchi, et al. (2014) MeteoritPlanet Sci 49(2):188. [3] T. Matsumoto, et al. (2014) MeteoritPlanet Sci Supp 77:5130. [4] S. Assonov, et al. (1998) in 29thLPSC #1635. [5] N. Hirata, et al. (2009) Icarus 200:486.1631.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
	References