1645.PDF
IMPACT MELT WAVEFRONTS AT LUNAR COMPLEX CRATERS: MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND INSIGHTS INTO IMPACT MELT EMPLACEMENT DYNAMICS Deepak Dhingra1, James W. Head2 and Carle M. Pieters2, 1Department of Physics, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844 (deepdpes@gmail.com), 2Department of Earth, Environment and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912.  Introduction: The rapid and highly chaotic nature of the impact cratering process [e.g. 1] makes it unfavorable to preserve any fragile morphological features. The large scale movement of material, nearly instantaneous melting and subsequent re-adjustments in the crater morphology, together produce varied landscapes across the craters. High spatial resolution global datasets from recent lunar missions [e.g. 2,3,4] are now identifying fine-scale morphological details preserved at impact craters that have important implications for understanding the cratering process. Here, we document the occurrence of coherent sheets of impact melt, on the scale of kilometers, in different parts of selected impact craters. We discuss potential implications of these newly recognized morphological features in understanding the emplacement dynamics of impact melt.    Impact Melt Wavefront: We define an impact melt wavefront as a continuous and extensive sheet of impact melt (Figure 1) with a clearly defined leading edge (yellow markings in Figure 1b, edges are about 100 m thick). These features are different from the generally recognized impact melt flows. Impact melt wavefronts have a planar geometry (length and width are comparable) as compared to the linear nature (more long than wide) of impact melt flows. We have so far observed these melt units at geologically young impact craters. Based on these observations, the general character of these units has been documented. Morphological Character: Impact melt wavefronts display morphological diversity in terms of surface texture, spatial extent and nature of the leading edges. They generally tend to have an optically smooth surface but occasionally, it can be rough due to the presence of abundant unmelted material (clasts) embedded in the melt sheet. The linear extent of impact melt wavefronts ranges from about a kilometer to tens of kilometers. They tend to occur in clusters (several wavefronts) and are generally parallel to sub-parallel with respect to each other. The leading edges of the impact melt wavefronts have been observed to have small, rounded to subrounded lobate ends (examples marked by yellow arrows in Figure 1a). Occassionally, the leading edges are smooth and continuous. In some cases, it is possible to identify an entire unit (leading edge and the trailing planar sheet; bounded yellow unit in Figure 1b) while in other cases, only a leading edge is identifiable (yellow lines in Figure 1b).   Figure 1 Impact melt wave fronts as observed at the floor-wall interface in the NW section of crater Tycho. (a) Image showing the lobe-like morphology of some of the wave-fronts. Also, note their occurrence at various elevations. (b) The same image with extent of various wavefronts mapped. Image source: Kaguya Terrain Camera.   Spatial Distribution and Geologic Context: The occurrence of impact melt wavefronts is diverse. Some of them occur at the interface of crater floor and wall at different elevations. It is at times possible to identify several, individual wavefronts together at the same location. We have also identified relatively 1645.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
smaller but distinctly identifiable wavefronts in the central part of craters (e.g. Jackson crater). Sometimes they are in direct contact with the central peaks while on other occasions, they could be in contact with large boulders near the crater center. It is important to note that apart from their large spatial extent, the wavefronts are observed at generally higher elevations (couple of kilometers), whether it is the crater wall-floor interface or the central peaks. Impact melt wavefronts have also been reported from a terrace of Jackson crater [5]. We have mapped the distribution of impact melt wavefronts at craters Jackson and Tycho, as part of a more comprehensive effort in mapping impact melt deposits at complex craters [6, 7]. Our initial mapping of these melt units suggests their non-uniform occurrence. They are sometimes restricted to only one section of the crater (e.g. NW sector of crater Tycho) and are not observed elsewhere along the same crater unit. In other cases, a few clusters of impact melt wavefronts are observed around a section of the central peaks but nowhere else. This observed diversity in morphological character and distribution of impact melt wavefronts provides important clues about the nature of impact melt, the melt emplacement process and the possible factors that may have contributed to the occurrence and distribution of these melt units.   Implications for Understanding of Melt Dynamics and the Cratering Process: There are several inferences which could be drawn based on the observations made above. At the same time, they also raise some interesting questions and possibilities which could be tested with further analyses: i) Emplacement of impact melt as large, continuous sheet within the crater: The continuous nature of impact melt wavefronts strongly suggests that despite the chaotic environment inside the crater, at some point, the melt moved as a single unit and was emplaced in that form. Since the current morphological details are manifestations of the last stage in the cratering process, we can assume that even after all the large scale material movement, mixing of melt and unmelted material, this form of impact melt had sufficient viscosity to retain its continuous form at the time of emplacement. ii) Role of central peak formation/wall slumping in creating impact melt wavefronts: The scale of impact melt wavefronts together with their occurrence across the crater floor suggests that a large amount of energy was available in moving the melt around during the late stages of crater formation. There are several possibilities in this regard, including: a) melt movement triggered by crater wall slumping and terrace formation during crater re-adjustment [8]. b) large scale melt displacement caused by the formation of central peaks. iii)  Effect of impact conditions and target properties on the distribution of impact melt wavefronts: The occurrence of impact melt wavefronts in specific sections of the crater rather than uniformly along a crater unit (such as wall-floor interface or central peaks), points to the possible role of impact conditions (e.g. location uprange/downrange of impact, effect of local variations in P-T conditions on the melt properties) as well target properties (e.g. melt to clast ratio). Similar relationships have been explored earlier [8]. iv) Modification of impact melt wavefronts during crater re-adjustment: Some differences observed in the leading edge of the impact melt wavefronts (rounded to sub-rounded lobes compared to straighter edges elsewhere) hint at possible modification post-emplacement. We observe the rounded lobelike form of impact melt wavefronts largely along the floor-wall interface and at different elevations (Figure 1a). Crater re-adjustment aided differential movement of the wall material could potentially modify a straight looking edge of the wavefront while it was still partially molten. It is also possible that lobes were originally present in the leading edge of the wavefront. The study of impact melt wavefronts at impact craters can provide numerous new insights about the diverse character of impact melt, its emplacement and possible controlling factors. It also raises some interesting questions about the cratering process and the role of various crater formation stages in carving out the final landscape.  References: [1] Grieve R.A.F., M.R. Dence, P.B. Robertson (1977) Impact and explosion cratering, Roddy, Peppin and Merrill (Eds), 791-814 [2] Goswami J.N. and M. Annadurai (2009) Curr. Sci., 6(4), 486-491 [3] Haruyama et al. (2008) Earth, Planets, Space, 60, 243-256. [4] Chin G. et al. (2007) Space Sci. Rev., 129, 391-419.  [5] http://lroc.sese.asu.edu/posts/386 [6] Dhingra D. (2015) Ph.D. Thesis, Brown University, 503p. [7] Dhingra D. et al. (2014) AGU Fall Meeting, Abst.# P13D-386. [8] Hawke B.R. and J.W. Head (1977) Impact and explosion cratering, Roddy, Peppin and Merrill (Eds), 815-841.  1645.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
