1659.PDF
MODELLING THE EFFECT OF SEDIMENT THICKNESS ON COMPLEX IMPACT CRATER MORPHOLOGY. R. T. Hopkins1 and G. R. Osinski1,2, 1Department of Physics and Astronomy & Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada, 2Department of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, N6A 5B7, Canada (rhopkin8@uwo.ca)   Introduction: The final morphology of impact craters is strongly dependant on the composition and structure, and therefore strength, of the target planetary surface.  Impacts into purely crystalline targets, which have high strength and density, should result in different crater characteristics than an impact into a sedimentary or mixed target, which would have relatively lower strength and density [1]. Several studies have modelled impact craters on Earth assuming a mixed crystalline/sedimentary subsurface stratigraphy suggested from previous in-situ geologic studies [e.g., 2, 3, 4]. However, the primary focus of these studies was to find best-fit models to known crater structures, not to observe the effect of target layering on fundamental crater processes, specifically the excavation and modification stages of crater formation.  In this study, we advance work conducted in previous studies to quantify the effect that sediment thickness has on final complex crater morphology for impacts into  mixed sedimentary and crystalline targets. Hydrocode simulations:  To analyze impacts into mixed crystalline and sedimentary targets, 70 2D simulations were conducted using the multi-rheology hydrocode iSALE-2D [5]. The target was composed of two materials: a crystalline basement overlain by a sedimentary layer with thickness that varied between 0 and 2.1 km. The projectile was 1.5 km in diameter, and the impact velocity was kept constant at ν=12 m/s  throughout all trials, with an acceleration due to gravity of g=9.81 m/s2 Two equations of state (EoS) were used in the simulations to compute the thermodynamic state of each material. Both the impactor and crystalline basement were composed of granite, using the ANEOS EoS [6] with parameters given in [7]. The sedimentary layer was approximated using a uniform layer of limestone, with the Tilltoson EoS [8], with similar parameters to the material described in [4]. Porosity was not included in either of the layers, but will be added in future simulations. Further material parameters and options for both the crystalline and sedimentary layers are given in Table 1. The simulations were run for 200 s, sufficient time for the midsized craters to reach final radius/depth. Post-processing of the data was conducted using iSALE Plot, a visualization program for analyzing data produced through iSALE. Crater radius and depth were computed using the 'crater profile' command (Pro) and through the use of coordinate data for Lagrangian tracer particles, which are non-interacting, massless particles that move with the flow of material and are able to record position and physical parameters. Radius and depth were computed at each time interval throughout the duration of the simulations. In addition, the 'material' command (Mat) to generate a visual output of the simulation. Results: As the thickness of the sedimentary layer increased from 0 km (pure-crystalline target), to 2.1 km, the final crater radius grew from 7.1 km to 8.5 km, as shown by the plot in Figure 1. When the sedimentary layer was thin (0-300 m), the results suggest that the addition of the weaker limestone layer made little difference to final crater radius. However, when sediment thickness was increased further (600-1200 m), it resulted in an increase in crater radius to ~8 km. Upon reaching and surpassing a threshold of ~1.5 km sediment thickness, crater radius is seen to plateau at ~8.5 km. Figure 1: The evolution of crater radius over time for varying sediment thickness. Shown are 8 of the trials, spaced 300 m (10 cells) apart. When sediment thickness is at a minimum, the final crater radius is ~7.1 km, increasing to ~8.5 km when the sediment thickness reaches its maximum value. As sediment thickness increases beyond 1.5 km, the final crater radius approaches a limiting value as the crystalline basement becomes an increasingly minor factor during the stages of crater formation. 1659.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Discussion:  Our results suggest that the thickness of a sedimentary layer above crystalline basement affects the final crater diameter to a surprisingly large degree, despite the overall energy of the impact remaining constant. The difference between no sedimentary cover and ~1.5 km of cover is 1.4 km, which would give an apparent diameter difference of 14.2 km vs. 17.0 km, respectively. The simplest explanation is that the increase in crater radius with increasing sediment thickness can be attributed to decreased strength of the limestone, assuming porosity of the material does not significantly affect final crater radius. As material is excavated to form the transient cavity, the limestone layer is excavated more efficiently than a pure-crystalline layer, leading to the formation of a wider initial crater. Once the crater begins to collapse, the sediment excavated from the transient cavity flows back towards the centre of the crater, leading to a shallow crater relative to a pure crystalline target. Figure 2 highlights this collapse for the 2.1 km sediment thickness simulation. Thus, the addition of a sedimentary layer over the crystalline layer leads to a increased crater radius and shallow final depth. As the thickness of the sedimentary layer continues to increase, the impact ceases to excavate the crystalline basement, thus resulting in the plateau in crater radius observable in Figure 1. If these models reflect what actually occurs during natural events, this has important implications for estimating the energy of an impact based on final crater diameter and also complicates the comparision of craters in different targets that, at first glance, may appear to have the same diameter. Future Work: To fully explore the relationship between sediment thickness and crater morphology, more parameters should be added to the simulations, including the addition of a porous sedimentary layer in place of the current, non-porous layer incorporated in the model. Furthermore, we wish to explore this scenario for oblique impacts in iSALE-3D to determine if similar trends are observed. References: [1] Melosh H. J. (1989). Oxford Univ. Press. New York, NY. [2] Shuvalov V. and Dypvik H. (2004). Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 39, 467-79. [3] Collins G. S. and Wünnemann K. (2005) Geology, 33, 925-28. [4] Collins G. S. et al. (2008). Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 43, 1955-77. [5] Elbeshausen D. and Wünnemann K. (2011) Proc. HVIS XI, 287-301. [6] Thompson S. L. and Lauson H. S. (1974). Report SCRR-71 0714, Sandia National Lab., Albuquerque, NM. [7] Pierazzo E. (1997) Icarus, 127,  408-23. [8] Tillotson J. H. (1962) Report GA-3216, General Atomic, San Diego, CA.   Table 1: Summary of simulation parameters for setup and crystalline/sedimentary layers. Simulation Resolution 25 Cells/Projectile Radius Impactor Radius 750 m Impactor Velocity 12 km/s Acoustic Vibration Decay Time 30 s  Sedimentary Layer Crystalline Layer/Projectile Density  2700 kg/m3 2680  kg/m3 Melting Temperature 1500 K 1673 K Figure 2: Simulation progression for a sedimentary thickness of 2.1 km. Excavated sediment flows back to fill the transient cavity, resulting in a shallower and wider final crater relative to a pure crystalline target. 1659.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
