1670.PDF
STRATIGRAPHIC STRUCTURES AND DEPOSITIONAL PATTERNS OF THE LOWERMOST NPLD, MARS, FROM SHARAD MAPPING.  S. Nerozzi1 and J. W. Holt1, 1Institute for Geophysics, Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of Texas at Austin (stefano.nerozzi@utexas.edu, jack@ig.utexas.edu).   Introduction:  Planum Boreum is a dome of layered icy material rising ~3 km above the surrounding plains in the northern hemisphere of Mars. Many studies involving both orbital imagery [1-3] and radar sounding [4-6] have subdivided Planum Boreum into two units of different composition and internal structure: a basal accumulation of siliciclastic fine material cemented by interstitial water ice (the basal unit, BU) and an overlying blanket of almost pure water ice (North Polar Layered Deposits, NPLD). The two units appear to have very different deposition ages, rates and styles. However, the reason for such an abrupt change in deposition is still unknown. Due to exposures in scarps and trough walls, detailed stratigraphy of the uppermost NPLD layers and their evolution have been studied extensively since the first orbital images [7]. However, large portions of Planum Boreum are still unmapped and no detailed studies of the BU-NPLD contact have been performed to date, primarily due to a general lack of outcrops. Correlation of reflectors within radargrams acquired by the Shallow Radar (SHARAD) [8] onboard Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter makes detailed stratigraphic reconstructions of Planum Boreum possible. The aim of this study is to map the lowermost NPLD and the BU-NPLD contact along SHARAD profiles in order to determine geologic characteristics of the two units and quantify depositional patterns. The results are then compared with a water-ice accumulation model tuned for Planum Boreum with the eventual goal of tying stratigraphic structures and depositional anomalies to orbitally forced climatic variations. Methods: This study involves the tracking of radar reflectors ("horizons") in SHARAD radargrams in Planum Boreum. Single reflectors are assumed to represent isochron surfaces and to result from changes in the concentrations of dust that significantly alter the dielectric constant [9,10]. A set of 4 horizons was tracked across 700+ radargrams in a seismic interpretation environment (Landmark DecisionSpace) and after depth conversion with the assumption of a bulk composition equivalent to water ice (εr=3.15), thicknesses are calculated for each stratigraphic interval using ArcMap. The resulting isopach maps are then analysed to identify depositional patterns and determine the lateral extent of these layers. The results are then compared with a global ice accumulation model tuned for Planum Boreum [11] and a mesoscale wind model over the pre-NPLD surface [12]. Results: The oldest sedimentary record in the NPLD is characterized by anomalies evident in two reflectors that appear to be similar and are located just above the BU (layer 1a) and Vastitas Borealis interior unit (VBi [3], layer 1b). They are bounded by pinch-outs that delineate a non-depositional or erosional hiatus, or a thickness below the 8.4 m theoretical resolution of SHARAD in water ice [8]. Layer 1a is characterized by uniform thickness and a sudden equatorward pinch-out at its border, over a large region (in hundreds of radargrams). Its shape is roughly circular with a center slightly shifted from the North Pole towards Gemina Lingula. Layer 1b is located in the Gemina Lingula region and is bounded laterally by pinch-outs. It appears to drape the VBi unit and attenuate its roughness, and the thickness is uniform with minimal local variations. Layer 1b represents the first NPLD deposit in Gemina Lingula and its extent roughly matches the one of proto-Gemina Lingula [13]. Figure 1: (a) Isopach map of lowermost radar layers in the NPLD, superimposed to the MOLA shaded relief map of Planum Boreum. An accumulation gap is present between the two horizons. Red arrows indicate the location of following figures and radargram directionality, the black star indicates the north pole. (b,c) Samples of interpreted SHARAD radargrams 1234301 and 0484401 showing the pinch-outs of the same reflectors(pink and purple, respectively) over the mapped base of the NPLD (white dashed line). A previously undetected reflector, indicated by the yellow dotted line, is interpreted as the top of the VBi unit. 1670.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Radargrams also show the presence of a weak reflector located under the saddle between the main lobe and Gemina Lingula, adjacent to the BU and lying beneath layer 1b. This reflection is persistent in many intersecting radargrams and is interpreted as the top of the VBi unit. It follows that the sedimentary body above this reflector and below the NPLD base represents a previously undetected unit. At the presently mapped extent, this unit does not outcrop, making a visible imagerybased characterization impossible. Discussion: In contrast to the upper NPLD which exibits broadly uniform accumulation in this area, we find distinctive non-uniform accumulation. Since layers 1a and 1b are not laterally continuous and their relative ages cannot be determined, three different scenarios are plausible. (1) They may represent a single, widespread depositional event, followed by erosion and/or sublimation. Alternatively, (2) ice deposition was simply localized, implying a purely constructional origin. Finally, (3) they may be two separate deposits with distinct depositional and/or erosional histories. The BU may have also contributed to the first phases of NPLD growth by supplying ice and siliciclastic material. This seems a plausible explanation for the origin of the unit newly mapped beneatth Gemina Lingula. This unit is adjacent to the known BU and no clear contact is visible between the two. Therefore, the newly identified unit may be laterally continuous to the BU and represent a thin extension of BU itself beneath the NPLD in the Gemina Lingula region. Both insolation and reworking of icy material by winds may concur to produce the described anomalous extents of the lowermost NPLD deposits. In the first case, steeper, equator-facing slopes along the BU margin would expose ice to increased solar radiation incidence, thus enhancing water ice sublimation on the slope. The same effect could be caused by katabatic winds accelerating down slopes [14]. Analysis of the mesoscale wind model partially support this hypothesis: winds have relatively high velocities along the BU slope, but the direction is not compatible with the hypothesized katabatic winds. Emplacement of layer 1a and 1b may also be compared with modeled NPLD accumulation [11]. The model shows that water ice could not accumulate for long periods at the north pole (i.e., significant ice cap growth was not likely) earlier than ~4 Ma. Therefore, layer 1a and 1b potentially represent the first deposition of water ice that was not followed by a complete retreat event. The model shows many "failed" accumulation episodes before 4 Ma, which may correspond to a period of pre-NPLD surface reworking involving the newly identified unit and aeolian BU deposits [12]. Future work: More radar-based mapping is necessary to define the nature of the newly identified deposit in Gemina Lingula, including its lateral extent, composition and thickness, and investigate its relationship with the BU. In addition, the effect of insolation on the lowermost NPLD layers has yet to be quantitatively determined. An insolation model based on orbital forcing and preNPLD topography would satisfy this requirement.  Combining such a smodel with mesoscale atmospheric modeling could further constrain the environrmental parameters required to produce the observed accumulation patterens. Conclusions: Stratigraphic mapping of Planum Boreum based on SHARAD profiles shows depositional anomalies and limited areal extent in the lowermost (oldest) NPLD radar layers. These results can be explained by water ice sublimation enhanced by increased insolation along equator-facing slopes and reworking by winds. The emplacement of these layers can be matched with the first phase of an orbitally-forced ice accumulation model at ~4 Ma. In addition, radar-based mapping revealed the presence of a previously unidentified deposit beneath the NPLD in Gemina Lingua that appears to be laterally contiguous with the BU. Acknowledgments: This work was supported by NASA MDAP grant NNX11AL10G and the Jackson School of Geosciences fellowship at the University of Texas at Austin. References: [1] Byrne S. and Murray B.C. (2002) JGR, 107, 11-1-11-12. [2] Fishbaugh K.E. and Head J.W. (2005) Icarus, 174, 444-474. [3] Tanaka K.L. et al. (2008), Icarus, 196, 318-158. [4] Picardi G. et al. (2005), Science, 310, 1925-1928. [5] Brothers T.C. et al. (2010), LPS XLI, Abstract #2590. [6] Selvans M.M. et al. (2010), JGR, 115, E09003. [7] Murray B.C. et al. (1973), Science, 180, 638-640. [8] Seu R. et al (2007), JGR, 112, E05S05. [9] Nunes D.C. and Phillips R.J. (2006), JGR, 111, E06S2. [10] Phillips R.J. et al. (2008), Science, 320, 1182-1185. [11] Greve R. et al. (2010), Planet. Space Sci. 58,, 931-940. [12] Brothers et al. (in prep.). [13] Holt J.W. et al. (2010), Nature, 465, 446449. [14] Smith et al. (2013), JGR, 118, 1835-1857. Figure 2: (a) Water ice accumulation model in Planum Boreum [11]. (b) Mesoscale wind model over the preNPLD surface [12]. The black star indicates the north pole. 1670.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
