1675.PDF
EXOPLANET ATMOSPHERE SPECTRAL MIXING AND UNMIXING MODELS: TOWARD MEASUREMENT OF ATMOSPHERIC CONSTITUENTS M. S. Fusco1 and S. Singh1, 1Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Sciences (University of Arkansas, Edward Durell Stone House North (STON) 346½ North Arkansas Avenue, Fayetteville, AR, 72701 USA).  Introduction: The study of exoplanets is a rapidly growing set of topics within the astrophysics and planetary science communities. As with any novel subject, the information scientists gathered to date is  understandably sparse, and is constrained to orbital parameters and bulk density estimates for the recently discovered worlds. Presently, a few exoplanets are directly observed with the help of adaptive optics rather than through transit or spectroscopic detection[1]. For even fewer exoplanets, there exist observations of atmospheres through relatively crude spectra taken during transit.  Atmospheric compositions, while interesting in their own right, are a likely path in searching for life in the galaxy. Quantifying atmospheric constituents may assist in identifying hospitable planets. The presence of certain compounds in excess in an atmosphere may be considered a tracer or indicator that life is present. The preeminent method for taking inventory of compounds in atmospheres (with the exception of in situ measurement), is through the analysis of spectra from the planet. For planets other than Earth, this is primarily accomplished through transit spectroscopy: viewing the planet when it crosses between the observer and the host star. A small fraction of the light from the host star passes through the atmosphere of the planet and continues to the observer, where different compounds can be identified through spectral absorption bands.  Up to now, a small number of exoplanets, mostly ‘hot jupiters’ (gas giants orbiting in proximity to their host stars) have their atmospheres observed in transit [2,3,4]. These spectra tend to be low resolution and high noise. Spectroscopy inherently requires a large number of photons as compared to simple photometry, so collecting enough light to produce high resolution spectra is a challenge. A compounding problem is that most of the light collected will be starlight, rather than light that has passed through the atmosphere of the planet. This results in low resolution spectra with a very low signal to noise ratio, not ideal for identifying compounds, let alone quantizing their abundance.  A next generation of ground and space based telescopes are imminent. These will possess capabilities that far outstrip the current technology, and higher quality spectra should become available within a decade. With this in mind, accurate calculation of the atmospheric constituents and their abundances for many exoplanets is a reasonable possibility in the near future. In preparation for these new spectra, it would be effective to have at the ready a spectral mixing and unmixing database and software package. The system would formulate hypothetical spectra for a speculated atmosphere, or, input real data and perform an unmixing to determine the relative abundances of constituent endmember compounds.  Therefore, we embarked on development of such a system for creating and analyzing spectra directed toward the upcoming study of exoplanet atmospheres. Mindful of the expected influx of data from new telescope systems such as James Webb Space Telescope, we may incorporate the limitations of such observatories into our models. It would be beneficial to learn the detection limits of such instruments. Methods: Linear mixing of endmember spectra is not an inherently difficult process; if the concentrations and relative saturation of the endmember spectra are known, then the mixed spectrum is simply a weighted average of the two or more constituent endmembers. What is necessary, however, is the compilation of a database of reliable endmember spectra from different sources in the correct frequency bands. We have written functions in MATLAB to perform our spectal mixing. In addition, we compiled a database of spectra for common atmospheric endmembers as an input to our mixing model.  Most of the endmember spectra for our mixing model are sourced from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) online spectral database. Infrared spectra from each compound are processed such that the wavelength range and resolution are consistent with the other spectra in our database. Each of these endmembers can be an input in our MATLAB mixing routine. The spectrum files are also available as inputs to our spectral unmixing model.     Figure 1: Example of linearly mixed spectra. Left: 75% CO, 25% SO2 linearly mixed, Right: 25% CO, 75% SO2 linearly mixed. 1675.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Gas spectra observed at different dilutions (with laboratory gas partial pressures being divided between the observed compound and a neutral compound) result in different relative saturation in the spectra produced. That is to say, for example, a gas that is 400 mmHg in total pressure, but 100 mmHg CO2 and 300 mmHg N2 will produce a more saturated spectrum than a 50 mmHg CO2 and 350mmHg N2 mixture. This phenomenon is demonstrated through the BeerLambert law, which relates the attenuation of light to the medium through which it is travelling. A medium with a higher absorption coefficient (higher concentration of active gas) will produce deeper spectral lines.  In attempting to create endmembers for a mixing model, this difference in depth for different partial pressures should be taken into account. Each endmember should be normalized to a specific partial pressure of saturation. We have been able to extract the initial mass of methane in a liquid mixture from the resultant spectra (see figure 2). Developing a similar extraction model for gas spectra using a known concentration from NIST is an approachable problem.   Figure 1: Spectral saturation as a result of different ratios of target to neutral compounds. Background colored lines are modeled spectra for different concentrations of methane. Thick colored lines are experimentally measured results in laboratory, which match their corresponding modeled lines well.   The model for unmixing spectra which we adopted is that of Combe et. al (2008)[5]. The MultipleEndmember Linear Spectral Unmixing Model (MELSUM) algorithm necessitates as input two or more endmember spectra and an unknown spectrum to be identified. In practice, the two or more endmember spectra would be different atmospheric constituent endmembers from our database. The model then selects the best linear combination of these endmembers that result in the unknown spectrum. A residual spectrum is also produced, which represents the difference between the MELSUM fit and the unknown spectrum. The residuals may contain either noise or additional compounds that were not modeled.  Results: We have attempted to fit methane and water spectra to previously existing exoplanet transit spectral data. The low quality of fit that resulted was part of the motivation for this research. In preparing our model for future use, we will create artificial spectra using our linear mixing model, and attempt unmixing using MELSUM. The MELSUM unmixing model will serve as a check for the consistency and accuracy of our mixing model.  Our linear mixing code is written in MATLAB and has been implemented to test mixing of a few compounds. Our spectral endmember database is in the process of being expanded to include all relevant gaseous atmospheric compounds. Spectral endmembers for our database will be normalized with respect to their partial pressures such that mixing results in properly weighted spectra. Mixtures will be checked against a MELSUM fit of the mixed spectra against the endmembers to show that our mixing model is producing the correct spectra. Future Goals: The plan is to continue to expand our mixing and unmixing models to be capable of working with many different compounds. Producing hypothetical mixed spectra that are informed by likely planetary atmospheric conditions is one possibility. The temperature ranges of stability for different compounds dictate which families will be found in which temperature ranges. These factors should be a utilized aspect of analysis, both in forming hypothetical spectra and in searching for compounds in experimental spectra. The main obstacle in categorizing exoplanet atmospheres today is instrumental resolution. Producing model spectra with the resolution and noise levels of upcoming telescopes such as JWST will allow a determination of the limitations for new atmospheric measurements in the coming decades.  References: [1] D. Charbonneau et. al, 2005, ApJ 626, 523-529 [2] N. Crouzet, P.R. McCullough, D. Deming, and N. Madhusudhan,2014, ApJ 795 166  [3] Sing et. al, 2011, MNRAS 416 [4] Swain et. al, 2008, ApJ 690, L114-117 [5] J.-Ph. Combe et. al, 2008, Planetary and Space Science 56 (2008) 951–975    1675.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
