1693.PDF
INITIAL RESULTS FROM THE DESERT FIREBALL NETWORK.  M. C. Towner1, P. A. Bland1, M. C. Cupak1, R. M. Howie1, E. K. Sansom1, J. P. Paxman5, M. Inie5, M. Galloway6, G. Deacon2, K. A. Dyl1, G. K. Benedix1,S. J. Tingay3, J. A. Harrison4, A.W.R. Bevan21 Dept. Applied Geol., Curtin Univ., GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E–mail: martin.towner@curtin.edu.au, 2 Dept. Earth Planet, Sci., Western Australian Museum, Welshpool, Perth,WA 6986. 3 Int. Centre for Radio Astron. Res., Curtin Univ., Perth, WA 6845, Australia. 4 iVEC, 26 Dick Perry Ave., Kensington, Perth, WA 6151, Australia. 5 Dept. Mech. Eng., Curtin Univ., Perth, WA 6845, Australia. 6 School Comp. Math., Univ. Western Australia, Perth, WA 6009, Australia.Introduction:  The  Desert  Fireball  Network is alarge network of cameras across the Australian outback,designed for recording meteor entry and recovering theassociated meteorite. The outback offers excellent meteorite  searching  conditions  compared  to  temperatezones, and the Australian climate provides many clearnights for good coverage. The current system is an evolution  of  the  earlier  trial  film-based  network[1],  andnow uses self-contained digital video and still cameras. Progress: To date, 30 cameras have been deployed,over South Australia and Western Australia, as shownin  fig  1.  Initial  systems were  deployed  in  early-mid2014 on the Nullarbor plain, an area well known formeteorite finds. The second phase of expansion, fromOctober 2014,  was focused on South Australia, covering areas with large dry lakes, again good for searching.  Other  minor  deployments  have  been  in  the  WAwheatbelt,  which is  easy to  support  logistically fromPerth, and is good searching for the fallow part of theyear.System description:  The  hardware  consists  of  astill camera (Nikon D800, Samyang 8mm fisheye), anda  video camera (Watec 902H,  Fujinon fisheye),  supported by a single board PC and hard disks. A Liquidcrystal shutter is incorporated into the lens, to act as aflickering shutter to breaks the fireball track in a longexposure, to permit calculation of the fireball velocity[2]. Internet link is provided by 3G mobile coverage, orLAN/Wifi,  depending  on  deployment.  A small  solarpower system is used for remote sites, or mains powerif available.  Fig 2 shows a typical camera system (atMount  Ives  homestead),  with  camera  mounted  on  astand with a sunlight shield. Solar panels and batteryare located directly next to the camera.Data pipeline: the network is supported by a mainsserver located in Perth, and access to the iVEC/PawseyCentre HPC data store for large data storage. The stillcameras  record  images  every 30  seconds  throughoutthe night, and process them during the day, searchingfor fireballs.  Video  is  recorded  throughout  the night,and  mostly  deleted  in  the  morning,  unless  a  corresponding fireball is observed. The still images are processed on-board the camera system, such that only textfiles and occasional images are transferred to the mainserver,  reducing the bandwidth requirements.  All  images are stored in the camera itself for later off-line retrieval (by hard disk swapping).The  server  correlates  events  seen  by  individualcameras, and attempts to triangulate them to give meteor  trajectory  solutions.  Any plausible  solutions  areforwarded to  an operator  along with relevant  imagesand fall  mass/position estimates for further investigation. This automated pipeline reduces the manual intervention to a minimum, allowing a large network to beoperated by only a few people.Initial  statistics:  commercial  hardware  performance is proving satisfactory for the requirements ofthe project.  Out of  30  systems deployed for  about  1year,  2  systems  have  failed  with  mechanical  shutterproblems and have been replaced. The 2 oldest working  systems  currently  have  shutter  counts  of  over300,000 exposures.The network operates as a VPN on top of heterogeneous  infrastructure,  and  there  are  frequent  networkdropouts with individual systems (usually the more remote systems running on 3G networks). Once connection is re-established, backlogged data is automaticallytransfered, and the server then re-checks for any newviable triangulations. At remote sites, solar power hasbeen more reliable than mains, as brief power cuts arenot uncommon in the outback, and these result in system re-boots.  In  future,  solar  will  be  preferred,  or  aUPS backup will be used.With the current network of 30 cameras, we recordabout  1  good  triangulatable  result  every  1-2  weeks.Only some of these are meteorite dropping events. It isvery likely that more fireballs have been recorded, butare not detected by the current generation of softwaredeployed on the cameras. Once the hard disks are recovered, the data can be re-analyzed using newer tools.Geminids: over 14-15th December, the DFN cameras saw a marked increase in fireballs, with 3 double1693.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
station events recorded in one night, plus multiple single station events. See fig 3.Future: Several  of  the more  remote  camera  systems have no internet link; data from those systems isadded to the archive after expeditions to retrieve andreplace  the  hard  disks.  (Event  detection  software  isthen re-applied to the new dataset in combination withother  nearby cameras).  New satellite  modems are  intesting to integrate these remote cameras to the realtime network.Additionally there  will be further  deployments  ofmore camera systems, in New South Wales, South Australia and Western Australia. We expect to have over 50deployed cameras by mid-late 2015, and approximately60TB of archived all-sky imagery, available for analysis by interested researchers.References: [1] Bland P.A. et al. 2012, AustralianJ. Earth Sci. 59:177-187. [2] Howie, R. M. et al, thisconference (2015) Below: Figure 1; map of camera sites in Australia. Below left, Figure 2; deployed camera on stand with supporting solar  panels.  Below right,  Figure  3;  Gemindevent recorded by camera at Yalgoo, in the WA wheatbelt1693.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
