1697.PDF
CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC TEXTURES OF OLIVINE IN ARTIFICIAL COSMIC SPHERULES PRODUCED BY QUICK QUENCH EXPERIMENTS.  H. Isobe1 and T. Gondo1, 1Dept. Earth Envi. Sci., Grad. Sch. Sci. Tech., Kumamoto Univ., Kurokami, Kumamoto, 860-8555, Japan, e-mail: isobe@sci.kumamoto-u.ac.jp   Introduction:  Olivine is one of the most common minerals in the planetary materials including solid Earth and chondritic meteorites. Olivine crystals show characteristic textures in chondrules and micrometeorites (MMs) depending on heating and cooling histories, especially in extraordinary quick cooling rates. Source materials of micrometeorites are interplanetary dust particles derived from asteroids and comets and continuously falling to the Earth [1]. Some MMs show remarkable similarity on mineralogy and chemical compositions to carbonaceous chondrite [2]. MMs are classified on their size, mineralogical and chemical properties [3]. Characteristic variations in textures of MMs are also reported in literatures [e.g., 4-6]. In this study, quick heating and cooling experiments of chondritic materials and mixed olivine particles were carried out in a fine particles free falling apparatus [7]. This apparatus can be applied to reproduce atmospheric thermal processes of MMs, especially completely melted cosmic spherules (CSs) from chondritic fine particles [8]. Depending on their velocity, mass and entry angle, MMs have undergone various degrees of heating during the atmospheric entry within a few seconds, then quenched quickly. The thermal histories of interplanetary dust particles lead to significant textural, mineralogical and chemical modifications to olivine in CSs.  Experimental: Starting materials are powdered chondrites (CV, CM and H) and mixed powder of natural olivine (Fo90), fayalite and a synthesized olivine (Fo55). The typical diameter of the starting material particles is approximately 100 µm. Each particle is fragments of chondrules, matrix or other components of each meteorite, or single crystal of olivine or mixture of two or three kinds of raw materials.  Heating and quenching experiments are carried out in a high temperature vertical furnace with regulated gas flow of H2, CO2 and Ar to control oxygen fugacity and total gas flow. Particles can be heated to 1400 °C within two seconds, are kept over 1400 °C approximately one second and quenched within a second. The maximum temperature of the particles is approximately 1520 °C. Maximum temperature of each particle has negative correlation to diameter of the particles, and cooling rate has positive correlation to the diameter depending on the falling velocity. Oxygen fugacity is controlled to FMQ+2.5 log unit equivalent to that of the upper atmosphere at approximately 86 km in altitude where MMs are heated.  The outside shape of the retrieved run products are observed with a scanning electron microscope. Inner textures of the particles are observed on polished section of the particles. Chemical compositions are also analyzed on the sections. Results and Discussion: The run products show quite analogous textures to CSs including scoriaceous, porphyritic olivine and barred olivine. The most of molten particles show spherical shape due to surface tension of silicate melt. The outside shapes of the particles are various depending on melt fraction of the particles and crystallographic textures of secondary grown olivine crystals.  The most abundant texture of artificial CSs is porphyritic olivine spherules (Fig. 1). Olivine phenocrysts have Fe-rich rim overgrown on the surface of relict olivine from melt in quenching. The shape of olivine phenocrysts in porphyritic spherules are characterized by sharp edges. Crystal faces of olivine phenocrysts can be seen on the surface of the spherule. The sharp edged olivine phenocrysts are rare in chondrules but it is quite common in CSs. Fig. 1 Backscattered electron images of a porphyritic olivine spherule produced from a particle of Murchison meteorite. Upper left; surface of the spherule. Upper right and bottom; polished section. Scale bars represent 10 µm. 1697.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
In the completely melted spherules, barred olivinelike structures can be seen (Fig. 2). Due to extraordinary high cooling rate up to 2×106 °C/hour and degrees of supercooling, olivine bars show chained structure of H-shaped [9] or hourglass shaped units [10] which are distinctive characteristics for quick growth of olivine in quenching. In spite of quite short period of crystal growth processes, chained olivine aligns parallel bars in the almost entire spherule. Run products from olivine particles show various textures depending on proportions of three kinds of starting materials in the particles. Fayalite particles melt completely and form barred olivine-like spherules with low pyramid structures on the surface (Fig. 3). Dendritic olivine crystals with regulated crystallographic orientation are developed in melted particles. Surface texture of melted particles may be affected by the dendritic olivine crystals grown in the spherules. Oriented dendrites of magnetite also occur between olivine crystals. The texture of oriented dendrite of olivine with tiny magnetite is quite similar to natural CSs [3]. Fo90 olivine grains are not melted by themselves concordantly with the phase relation of olivine. Internal textures of Fo55 olivine crystals show quick partial melting when the temperature reaches solidus temperature, then fractional crystallization occur to be controlled by an original crystal orientation. In the mixed olivine particles, crystals of Fo90 and Fo55 olivines dissolve to iron-rich melt derived from melting of fayalite.  Dissolution of relict crystals produce steep chemical gradient at interface between crystals and melt. In the particles including relict crystals of Fo90 olivine, huge supersaturation degree developed in the melt contacted with the surface of the relict crystals in the quench process. In the quick cooling process, crystallographic orientation of overgrown olivine is controlled by relict crystals.  Melting, nucleation and crystal growth processes in tiny silicate melt spherules control crystallographic textures of olivine in extraordinary quick quenching processes. The crystallographic textures of olivine develop external and internal textures of CSs and chondrules. References: [1] Love S. G. and Brownlee D. E. (1991) Icarus, 89, 26-43. [2] Reietmeijer F. J. M. (2000) MPS, 35, 1025-1041. [3] Genge M. J. et al. (2008) MPS, 43, 497-515. [4] Cordier C. et al. (2011) MPS, 46, 1110–1132. [5] Sedaghatpour F. and Sears D. W. G. (2012) MPS, 44, 653–664. [6] Van Ginneken M. et al. (2012) MPS, 47, 228–247. [7] Isobe H. and Gondo T. (2013) Jour. Mineral. Petrol. Sci., 108, 227237. [8] Gondo T. and Isobe H. (2013). LPS XXXXIII, Abstract #1882. [9] Donaldson C. H. (1976) Contrib Mineral Petrol, 57, 187-213. [10] Faure F. et al. (2003) Contrib. Mineral. Petro.l, 145, 251-263.  Fig. 2 Backscattered electron images of a barred olivine-like spherule produced from a particle of H chondrite (Zag). Upper left; surface of the spherule. Upper right and bottom; polished section. Scale bars represent 10 µm.  Fig. 3 Backscattered electron images of a barred olivine-like spherule produced from a fayalitic olivine particle. Upper left; surface of the spherule. Upper right and bottom; polished section. Scale bars represent 10 µm. 1697.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
