1720.PDF
SHOCK EFFECTS IN THE MORASKO METEORITE – PRELIMINARY DATA.  T. Brachaniec1, 1University of Silesia, Faculty of Earth Sciences; Department of Geochemistry, Mineralogy and Petrography; Bedzinska 60 str., 41-200 Sosnowiec, Poland; tomasz.brachaniec@o2.pl.   Huge pressure and high temperature generated during meteor impact on the Earth may cause so-called "shock" changes in the meteorite structure. Crystals of kamacite, cohenite and schreibersite deformation may be caused by shock, which can be shown on the X-ray diffraction investigation [1]. Shocked kamacite shows unusual features during the X-ray diffraction, like asterism or diffuse Laue spots [2]. Itmay indicate that kamacite had been severely shocked [3]. Shock pressure higher than 190 kbar can cause crystallographic deformations in three meteoritic minerals: 1) kamacite, 2) cohenite and 3) schreibersite [4]. It is emphasized [5] the use of static high-pressure data on phase equilibria together with shock wave and thermal physics calculations, which allow interpretation of observed microstructures in shocked meteorites. The main effects of shock structures in meteorites, which are possible for microscopic observation are deformations: brittle, plastic and thermal. The mentioned types are present in the meteorite Morasko.  Samples and methods:  To observe the shock structures, five fragments of the Morasko meteorite were selected. Their surface has been sanded, polished and etched. SEM investigations were conducted using a Philips XL 30 ESEM/TMP scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an EDS (EDAX) detector. The analyses were carried out at the Faculty of Earth Sciences, University of Silesia, Sosnowiec.  Results and discussion:  The optical observations show, that the investigated material was strongly shocked. The characteristic feature is the presence of crushed crystals of cohenite and schreibersite grains. Cohenite and schreibersite occur as large crystals and veins. During the SEM observations a three types of shock deformation were noted: brittle, plastic and thermal. Nevertheless, it seems that the plastic deformation prevails over brittle structures. This is probably caused by plastic properties of the metal [6]. Brittle deformations are slots on the phases contact and sometimes have a brecciated form. They mainly occur in the kamacite. Their formation were done at extremely low temperatures (in the case of iron temperature is about -190 °C), so it may prove that a collision in the space occured. Meteorites, which have these deformation easily may be disintegrated during impact [7]. Plastic deformation is a plain structure and Neumann lines, which arise into kamacite, as a result of rapidly short-term pressure. In the studied meteorites, one of the characteristic features are deep Neumann lines, which in some areas form a complex of many systems. These lines break down at the grain boundaries. Thermal changes usually blur or completely remove pressure evidences, causing partial or complete recrystallization of kamacite. This phenomenon can affect the whole body of the meteorite or only its outer zones, heated during the flight through the atmosphere [6]. References: [1] Jaeger R. R. and Lipschutz M. E. (1968) Geochim. et Cosmochim. Acta, 32, 773–779. [2] Leonhardt J. (1928) Zeitsch. für Kristallogr., 66, 449. [3] Jaeger R. R. and Lipschutz M. E. (1967) Nature, 213, 975–977. [4] Lipschutz M. E. and Jaeger R. R. (1969) Nature, 222, 766–767. [5] Sharp T. G. and De Carli P. S. (2006) In: D. S. Lauretta and H. Y. McSween Jr. (eds.) Meteorites and the Early Solar System, II, 653–677. [6] Jastrzębska A. (2009) Acta Societatis Metheorit. Polon., 1, 38–43. [7] Semenenko V. P. and Tertichnaya B. V. (1996) Mineralog. Żurnal, 18, 38–44.     1720.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
