1725.PDF
RECENT ADVANCEMENT OF SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT OF WISE-CAPS: A WEBGIS-BASED LUNAR AND PLANETARY DATA COLLABORATION SYSTEM.  J. Terazono1, R. Nakamura2, S. Kodama2, N. Yamamoto3, H. Demura1, N. Hirata1 Y. Ogawa1, 1The University of Aizu, Tsuruga, Ikki-Machi, Aizu-Wakamatsu, Fukushima 865-8580, JAPAN (terazono@u-aizu.ac.jp), 2AIST (National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-1-1, Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8568, JAPAN, 3NIED (National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention), 3-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-0006, JAPAN.   Introduction:  WISE-CAPS (Web-based Integrated Secure Environment for Collaborative Analysis of Planetary Science) [1-7] is a Web-GIS based information presentation and collaboration environment intended for research and scientific theory construction. The system is comprised of three computers, web server, database server and test server. The goal of the system is to create a virtual laboratory capability which can connect researchers who are remotely dispersed nationwide or worldwide. Here the term "virtual laboratory capability" includes the following function:  Web-based interface which can be accessible from mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets as well as conventional desktop.  Remote communication (multimedia-enabled. Audio and Visual communication).  Data sharing and user-aware access control mechanism.  Security enhancement for authentication and servers.      We adopt the following policies to enable this goal:  Full web-based operation. Here the concept "webbased" means that all operations can be made via web browsers, thanks to advancement of web standard such as HTML5. For example, our system does not need to use any file uploading / downloading softwares to manipulate files on the server.  Open standard compliant. WISE-CAPS employs widely accepted and established standards such as WMS (Web Mapping Service) and WFS (Web Feature Service). The base of all system are built with open-source software.  The text will automatically wrap to a second page if necessary. The running head on the second page of this template has been eliminated intentionally. Recent New Implementations:  We made constant enhancement of WISE-CAPS system since start of its development in 2008. Currently, we are focusing our development on usability and web appearance. Here are some of recent achievement:  New user authentication and control system …WISE-CAPS uses GridSite [8], module-based control system, as core of user authentication and control. As GridSite have its incompatibility with latest web server (Apache 2.4) and have no function of authentication beyond servers, we are now switching our user authentication and controlmechanism to LDAP and OpenAM. The combination of these two softwares is common for many recent system which has user control including single-sign-on (SSO) mechanism. We are foreseeing to expand system to use SSO mechanism for linkage with other system.  New user interface and web design … One of imperfection of WISE-CAPS is poor user interface, with few controlling buttons and links for control of display. We are now energetically implementing new style of main design of WISECAPS. It will have control buttons which govern many element of the display including size of window, drawing and layer control. This enhancement will contribute to better user experience in WISE-CAPS.  Advanced data registration system … Users need to upload their data to share and display in WISECAPS. Nevertheless, they need to link to the system via SFTP or SCP to upload information, and it is contrary to WISE-CAPS policy which all access, including data registration, should be webbased. To make all activities by users in WISECAPS within web browsers, we are preparing our own data registration system. The current data registration system is the second generation, with great enhancement since the first generation. The new generation system of data registration will have bundled data entry, all required files for display in WISE-CAPS (image data file, world file and map files, referred as dataset hereafter) in one time, Moreover, the system in development will have dataset based control mechanism (dataset addition, name modification and deletion). Also the system will be coupled with the new display system and can display newly registered dataset immediately.  Multimedia-based user communication system …Users of WISE-CAPS often need to communicate with other research colleagues with seeing their data. This communication will be made, not only by text, but by voice and movie. Thanks to recent advancement of web technology, we do not 1725.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
need to add any plug-ins for our web browser to make such multimedia communication. Our system in development uses HTML5 technology fully to disuse plug-ins which are obstacle for  multiplatform usability and cross-platform web experience, especially small devices. Multimedia web technologies such as WebRTC and WebSocket are used in the base of our system. Currently, the system can make a video call (up to four peers) and have capability to exchange location data in topic. We anticipate more system enhancements will be made until the conference.     We strongly believe that, with other implementation and refinements, WISE-CAPS will have more attractive features as the research platform soon. Future Direction:  The most important point to enable the policy is the in-server analysis of data. Almost of researchers uses their favorite software and applications for data analysis and visualization. Inserver data analysis enables them to share their analysis algorithms and programs in the server. We are now implementing this function despite some difficulties such as processing speed and displaying method. Currently, the usage of WISE-CAPS is confined to research of the Moon. And currently registered data is not many, lunar global data obtained by Clementine as a base layer, and three local data obtained by Kaguya, Despite continued test phase, we need to add more data for this system even for the evaluation. We need to gather and register more data to promote this system to other researchers.   References: [1] J. Terazono et al. (2008) Proc. Intl. Symp. on GeoInformatics for Spatial-Infrastructure Development in Earth and Allied Sciences, 239-244. [2] J. Terazono et al. (2009) LPS XL, Abstract #1232 [3] J. Terazono et al. (2010), LPS XLI, Abstract #1198. [4] J. Terazono et al. (2010), LNCS 6193, 58-68. [5] J. Terazono et al. (2013), JAXA-PR-12-006, 89-102 (Japanese only). [6] J. Terazono et al. (2013), JAXAPR-12-006, 89-102 (in Japanese).[7] J. Terazono et al. (2014), LNCS 8381, 266-273. [8] http://www.gridsite. org 1725.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
