 STUDIES ON SOLAR SYSTEM EXPLORATIONS USING DESTINY: THE DEMONSTRATION AND EXPERIMENTS OF SPACE TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERPLANETARY VOYAGE.  T. Iwata1,  Y. Kawakatsu1, G. Murakami1, Y. Ezoe2, S. Kameda3, K. Keika4, T. Arai5, T. Ikenaga6, and T. Saiki1,  1Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (3-1-1 Yoshinodai, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-5210, Japan; iwata.takahiro@jaxa.jp), 2Tokyo Metropolitan University, 3Rikkyo University, 4Nagoya   University, 5Chiba Institute of Technology, 6Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency.   Introduction:  Demonstration and Experiment of Space Technology for Interplanetary Voyage (DESTINY), a candidate mission of the Epsilon Class Small Program, aims to demonstrate new technologies for deep space mission using the Small Scientific Standard  (SSS) Satellite Bus.  The Epsilon Launch Vehicle is a new-generation Japanese solid-fuel rocket that provides low-cost access to space.  However, it is limited to a launch capacity of 200 kg to escape from the Earth. Therefore, we started to develop DESTINY to overcome the low-cost launch vehicle constraints for deep-space missions by using a large scale ion engine.  In this paper, we present the possible instruments and model missions for solar system sciences and space astronomy in the DESTINY series.     Figure 1.  DESTINY mission profile.    DESTINY Mission concepts:   Figure 1 presents the mission profile of the DESTINY demonstration stage.  The spacecraft will first be placed in a low elliptical orbit by the Epsilon Rocket, thus demonstrating the high energy orbit insertion.  It then increases its altitude usingμ20, a largescale ion engine.  After arriving at the Moon, it will be injected into a transfer orbit to approach the halo orbit of Sun-Earth Lagrangian point L1 or L2. Figure 2 indicates the DESTINY configuration.  The key technologies to realize the DESTINY mission are; 1) large-scale ion engine μ20 with a thrust of 40mN, 2) an ultra-light-mass solar panel with a power-tomass ratio exceeding 100 W/kg, and 3) a thermal control system using advanced thermal control devices such as a loop heat pipe and heat switches.   Table 1 lists a possible series of deep space mission using the DESTINY bus.  The DESTINY demonstration stage enables carrying scientific instruments of up to about 10 kg.  It is planned to observe during the transfer and Halo orbits of the Sun-Earth Lagrangian point L1 or L2.  The DESTINY applied missions will be able to carry higher-mass payloads to deep space.  We define two stages, category A and category B as in Table 1.  In category A, DESTINY will carry instruments of up to 50 kg to a point between Venus and Mars by using the Epsilon Launch Vehicle.  In category B, DESTINY will be launched by an improved launch vehicle equivalent to the M-V Rocket and will carry payloads of up to 200 kg on the Venus and Mars orbiters.     Figure 2.  DESTINY configuration.   Possible scientific objectives:  Potential scientific objectives between near Earth orbit and L1 or L2 halo orbits cover wide fields of solar system sciences and space astronomy.  Table 2 summarizes the candidate scientific instruments and targets for the DESTINY demonstration stage. Observations of plasma and energetic particles from space at around the distance of the Moon will help to clarify the structure of the terrestrial magnetosphere.  The X-ray telescope seeks to provide the first X-ray global imaging of the Earth's magnetospheric  structures such as magnetosheath, cusp, magnetopause, and bow shock.  A 10 cm diameter ultraviolet (UV) telescope with will simultaneously observe Lyman Alpha emission from the geocorona.  The Energetic Neutral Atom (ENA) Camera will provide a side-view of the dynamic magnetosphere.  It will be able to provide the first composite movies of how Earth's global magnetosphere responds to the solar wind.   DESTINY will also be useful for the pilot observations for future infrared, ultraviolet, gamma-ray, and cosmic-ray space astronomical telescope.  It will also be possible to observe and monitor Near Earth Objects (NEOs), inter-planetary and inter-stellar dust, and meteoroids.  The Dust Analyzer and High-Definition Television (TV) Camera will provide physical parameters, such as the size and density, and chemical features such as the metallic and organic composition of the interstellar dust to identify the original material of the solar system and life.  These instruments will also seek to observe one of the most unusual asteroids, 3200 Phaethon, which has dust tails.  The High-Definition TV Camera and Thermal Infrared (IR) Imager will observe the impact flash of the Moon. In DESTINY applied missions category A, a larger UV telescope will observe the absorption lines from extra-solar planets such as "hot Jupiter" or "super earth."  The Infrared Telescope orbiting outside the ecliptic plane will observe the cosmic background radiation.  In DESTINY applied missions category B, two orbiters will make climate observations of Venus, and the Mars dust-transport mechanism will be observed by combining a Martian airplane and a stationary satellite.   Table 1.  Possible deep-space missions using DESTINY. Stage Demonstration  mission Applied missions Category A Category B Rocket Epsilon Launch Vehicle  with Fourth Kick Stage Improved Epsilon  Launch Vehicle Payload mass 10 kg 50 kg 200 kg Example of  exploration  area Sun-Earth  L2 or L1 Flyby to celestial bodies  between Venus and Mars (ΔVmax ~ 2 km/s) Orbiting on celestial  bodies between Venus  and Mars  (ΔVmax ~ 5 km/s)   Table 2.  Candidate scientific instruments for DESTINY demonstration stage. Instrument Science objectives Mass [kg] X-ray Telescope SWCX (Solar Wind Charge eXchange) from the  terrestrial magnetosphere 10.0 UV Telescope Scattered emission from the geocorona 2.2 Lyman alpha fluxes of M-type stars with planets 8.7 ENA Camera ENA (Energetic Neutral Atom) from the terrestrial magnetosphere, and the heliopause / heliosheath of the solar system 7.0 Dust Analyzer Inter planetary and interstellar dust, meteoroid 5.0 High-Definition TV Camera Inter planetary and interstellar dust, meteoroid, NEO 4.0 Thermal IR Imager Impact flash on the lunar surface 0.8 Small Telescope NEO survey and orbit determinations  10 * Polarimeter Zodiacal light 10 * γ / Cosmic-ray Detector Background radiation at L2 point  10 * *) Tentative values.   