 Stable isotope studies of the Rochechouart impact structure: sources of secondary carbonates and sulphides within allochthonous and parautochthonous impactites. S. L. Simpson1, A. J. Boyce1, P. Lambert2, M. R. Lee1, P. Lindgren1. University of Glasgow, University Ave, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK. 2Sciences et Applications, 218 Boulevard Albert 1er, 33800 Bordeaux, France. S.Simpson.1@Research.gla.ac.uk.     Introduction: Hypervelocity impacts  are  among the  most  ubiquitous  processes  to  affect  solid  bodies within  our  solar  system  [1,  2].  Although  they  are notoriously devastating, citing responsibility for mass extinction  events  and  global  climate  perturbations, impacts can also create temporary environments which are favorable for life to thrive, if there is enough water present in the target, and sufficient energy is released as heat [1, 2]. One-third of impact structures on Earth contain  fossil  impact-initiated  hydrothermal  systems, and  they  are  therefore  being  explored  as  potential "cradles of life" on other solid planets and satellites in our solar system [1]. We are presenting a case for the evaluation of the Mesozoic Rochechouart impact structure in France as a once-habitable environment. Initial δ13C, δ18O and δ34S isotope data collected in 2014 from hydrothermal carbonates  and  sulphides  within  monomict  lithic impact  breccia,  collected  from  a  site  located  7.5km from the center of the structure at Champagnac quarry, supports our hypothesis of a warm, wet environment; we  also  found  evidence  for  metabolically  reduced sulphate [3]. Similar mineral assemblages can be found throughout  the  structure,  including  allochthonous breccias and low to unshocked target material. In order to explore our hypothesis further, a larger sample set was  collected  from  various  lithologies  within  the Champagnac  site  containing  sulphide  and  carbonate mineralization for δ13C, δ18O and δ34S isotope analysis in  January  2015.  These  results  will  allow  us  to determine  the  relationships  between  the  many hydrothermal mineral assemblages within this area of the  structure,  and  ask  whether  the  isotopic compositions  recorded  in  secondary  sulphides  and carbonates  of  the  impactites  are  inherited  from  the target,  or  possibly  represent  colonization  by thermophilic  microbes  during  the  post-impact hydrothermal period.     The Rochechouart impact structure:  The 23km diameter Rochechouart impact structure has been dated to 201±2Ma [4, 5], placing it on the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. The crater is located in west-central France, on the western margin of the Central-Massif and northeastern  edge  of  the  Aquitaine  basin,  with  a  mixed crystalline  target  composition  of  primarily  granitic metamorphic  and  intrusive  igneous  rocks  of  the Variscan orogeny [4]. It is highly eroded; none of the original morphology is preserved, yet enough material remains  to  provide  a  full  suite  of  impactites representing varying degrees of shock and mixing [4, 6].  Pervasive  hydrothermal  alteration  has  been observed at Rochechouart by previous authors [1, 4, 5, 6], and presents itself throughout all impact lithologies most notably as K-metasomatism, as  well  as argillic alteration and late stage carbonates [1, 4, 5, 7].    Initial  data:  During  a  previous  study,  secondary carbonates and sulphides were extracted from a small sample  set  of  autochthonous  and  parautochthonous (monomict  lithic  impact  breccia,  fig.  1  and  2) impactites from the study site of Champagnac for δ13C, δ18O and δ34S analysis [3, 7]. Pyrite δ34S values range from -10‰ to -26‰ (VCDT) indicating reduction of sulphate, possibly by thermophilic microbes during the post-impact  hydrothermal  period.  Carbonate  values reflect  a mixture of organic and inorganic reservoirs, and  a  warm  (50  to  70°C)  environment  of crystallization. Figure 1: SEM image of a clast of monomict lithic impact breccia, showing secondary chlorite (platy mineral)  and accessory anatase (TiO2, left). Figure 2:  Chemical  map  (EDX) of  monomict  lithic  breccia  clast (right,  green)  showing  secondary  silicate  overgrowth,  K-feldspar, and  dolomite  cement  (left,  purple).      Further  tests  of  the  'habitable  Rochechouart hypothesis': Carbonate and sulphide mineralization is prevalent  throughout  the  study site  of  Champagnac, and  can  be  found  within  basement,  autochthonous, parautochthonous and allochthonous lithologies [3, 6]. In  order  to  determine  the  relationship  and  origin  of these  deposits  in  the  context  of  our  'habitable Rochechouart'  hypothesis,  a  larger  sample  set consisting of a variety of lithologies was collected for δ13C,  δ18O  and  δ34S isotope  analysis  at  the  Scottish Universities Environmental Research Center (SUERC) [8]. The following rock types and mineral deposits are central to these tests: Figure 3: SEM image of secondary dolomite cement in monomict lithic impact breccia, used for initial δ13C, δ18O isotope analysis and further testing. Figure  4: Highly  altered  polymict  lithic  breccia  (matrix)  from breccia dyke found below transient crater floor, showing carbonate cement  (bottom  right)  and  secondary  k-feldspar  (middle, rhombohedral crystals) on quartz. Target  and  autochthonous  material:   Samples  of minimally-altered  basement  amphibolite  gneiss containing sulphides both within the fabric and crosscut  by  secondary  carbonate  and  sulphide  veins  (1), coarse  crystalline  calcite,  pyrite  and  chalcopyrite coatings on fracture surfaces (2) and k-feldspar veins containing  minor  amounts  of  euhedral  pyrite  were collected  for  analysis  (3).  Parautochthonous  and allochthonous material: A further amount of monomict lithic breccia was collected (1) as well as samples of a previously  undiscovered  polymict  breccia  dike containing  carbonate  mineralization,  located  beneath the transient crater floor. Clasts of the polymict breccia dike display high temperature reaction rims (100<°C), as well as a secondary carbonate cement suggestive of cooler  (100>°C)  temperature  alteration,  supporting  a complex hydrothermal history, also in agreement with other authors [4, 6].    Jurassic-Triassic boundary limestones and the Aquitaine  basin  shoreline:  As  the  target  was  in  a marginal  marine  environment  [4,  6],  the  question  is raised as to what influences the sea may have had on the geochemistry of Rochechouart impactites. What is left  preserved  of  the  Jurassic-Triassic  shoreline unconformably  overlies  crystalline  basement approximately  17km WSW of  the  structure's  center, only 5km outside the currently accepted diameter. The age  of  these  limestones  is  poorly  constrained,  and mapped by the French Geological Survey as "TriassicJurassic  limestones",   spanning  a  20  million  year period, from 210 to 190Ma (Rhaetian to Hettangian) [9].  These  limestones  are  contemporaneous  with  the age  of  the  Rochechouart  event.  It  is  also  worth mentioning that  evidence  presented  by other  authors supports  a  larger  diameter  (40  to  50km)  for  the Rochechouart structure than what is currently accepted (23km) [4,  6].  These limestones were collected from an outcrop at Montbron. Results from this research will shed  light  on  how impacts  interact  with  volatiles  in their targets, and more specifically, test the hypothesis that impact structures are ideal environments to search for life on other terrestrial bodies in our solar system.     Acknowledgements: Funding for this research was generously provided by the Barringer Family Fund for Impact Research [10]. Special thanks are also extended to the Reserve for  their assistance during field work and permission to collect [11].    References: [1] Osinski, G. R. et al. (2013) Icarus 224, 347-363 [2] Naumov, M. (2005) Geofluids 5, p165 to 184. [3] Simpson, S. et al (2014) Meteoritics and Planetary Science 49, Nr S1, A5 to A454. [4] Lambert, P. (2010) The Geological Society of America Special Paper 465. [5] Schmeider, M. et al. (2010) Meteoritics & Planetary Science 45, Nr 8, 1225-1242 [6] Sapers, H. et al (2014) Meteoritics and Planetary Science 49, Nr 12, 2152 - 2168. [7] Simpson, S. et al. (2014) 45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference #1039. [8] Scottish Universities Environmental Research Center, Rankine Ave, East Kilbride, G75 0QF, U. K. [9] Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières, geologic maps 686, 687. [10] Barringer Crater Company, PO Box 697, Flagstaff, AZ. [11] Réserve Naturelle de l'Astroblème de Rochechouart - Chassenon, CCPM Mairie-Place-du-Chateau, Rochechouart, France. 