 PRECISE  FIREBALL  TRAJECTORIES  USING  LIQUID  CRYSTAL  SHUTTERS  AND  DE  BRUIJN SEQUENCES.  Robert  M.  Howie1,  Eleanor  K.  Sansom2,  Philip  A.  Bland2,  Jonathan  Paxman1 and  Martin  C. Towner2,  1Dept.  of  Mechanical  Engineering,  Curtin  University,  GPO  Box  U1987,  Perth,  WA 6845,  Australia, robert.howie@curtin.edu.au 2Dept. Applied Geology, Curtin University. Introduction:  Meteor camera networks have been used  since  the  late  fifties  to  characterise  meteoroid orbits  and  calculate  meteorite  fall  positions  [1]. Previous designs used large format sheet film cameras to capture images of a meteoroid's luminous trajectory during  ablation.  Advances  in  digital  imaging technology  have  enabled  the  transition  from  large format  photographic  film  based  systems  to  systems based on digital still cameras like the Desert Fireball Network (DFN) [2]. Previous stills based meteor cameras used rotating or  oscillating  mechanical   shutters  to  chop  or periodically  interrupt  the  light  recorded  on  the  film plane  [3],[4].  This  breaks  the  streak  on  the  long exposure  image  into  short  segments  or  dashes;  the timing  of  which  is  precisely  known and  allows  the determination  of  the  meteor  velocity  after triangulation. Exposure times can range from a few seconds to one  night,  so  networks  using  long  exposure  images with periodic shutters for  velocity determination still require a method of establishing absolute timing along a fireball path in order to determine a trajectory. Prior designs  used  various  approaches  including  a combination  of  fixed  and  guided  cameras  [5] or photomultiplier tubes to log meteor luminosity [4], [6]. Video based systems such as [7],[8],[9] do not require an additional periodic shutter due to the high rate of image capture, nor do they require external hardware to provide absolute timing, but the resolution of video meteor  cameras  is  poor  compared  to  stills  based systems  leading  to  larger  errors  in  fall  position estimation. This  abstract  presents  a  technique  for  encoding absolute trajectory timing with relative timing without additional  hardware  using  a  liquid  crystal  shutter modulated  according  to  a  de  Bruijn  sequence.  This allows  the  development  of  high  resolution,  smaller, less  expensive  and  simpler  meteor  cameras  than previously possible. Meteor Velocity: The tight tolerances and bulk  of mechanical  shutter  assemblies  used  to  interrupt  light transmission  for  velocity  determination  significantly increase  system  complexity,  size,  cost  and manufacturing  time.  These  factors  need  to  be minimised whilst maintaining imaging performance in order to maximise network coverage area to enable the observation  and  recovery  of  as  many  meteorites  as possible. The  proliferation  of  consumer  liquid  crystal technology in  displays  and  more  recently active  3D display  shutter  glasses  has  made  inexpensive  liquid crystal (LC)  shutters readily available. These shutters provide a solid-state alternative to mechanical periodic shutters, significantly simplifying the system. They do, however, have limited light transmittance in their open state, approximately 36% for those in use on the DFN. Testing has shown that the LC shutters are a suitable replacement  for  mechanical  shutters  as  long  as  the light  loss  in  open  state  transmittance  is  acceptable. They are a good fit with digital image sensors where the  contamination  from  dust  and  dirt  is  of  higher concern than in film based systems. The LC shutters on DFN cameras operate at a rate of 10 Hz providing 20 luminous trajectory data points per second. Absolute  Trajectory  Timing: The  DFN  stations use coded operation of the LC shutter to determine the absolute timing for the start and end of the luminous trajectory. The time is encoded by modulating the LC shutter according to a de Bruijn sequence or cycle. A de  Bruijn  sequence  is  the  shortest  cyclic  sequence containing  all  possible  subsequence  for  a  given alphabet  size  and  subsequence  length  making  it  the optimal  encoding for this sort  of problem  [10].  For example,  the de Bruijn sequence generated using the prefer high method for an alphabet size of two and a subsequence length of three is '00011101'. As long as three consecutive elements in the cyclic sequence are known, it is possible to determine exactly where in the sequence the subsequence of three elements is. The LC shutter runs according to a de Bruijn sequence at a rate of ten elements per second throughout the 25 second exposure.  Currently,  the  sequence  parameters  are  10 elements per second, a subsequence length of nine and an  alphabet  size  of  two,  but  this  can  be  modified remotely  for  the  network  connected  systems.  The sequence  is  long  enough  that  it  doesn't  repeat  itself during the 25 second exposure. At least nine elements or  dashes  must  be  visible  in  the  fireball's  luminous trajectory  for  the  start  time  of  the  trajectory  to  be determined.  In  practice,  it  is  preferred to  have  more elements  visible  to  validate  the  position  in  the sequence. Validated timing is available for all meteors clearly visible for one second or longer. Sequence  Encoding: The  de  Bruijn  sequence  is encoded  using  pulse  width  or  dash  length.  A '1'  is represented by leaving the shutter open longer which results  in  a  longer  dash  and  a  '0'  corresponds  to  a  shorter open time and therefore a shorter dash in the image. The  advantage  of  this  approach  compared  to previous techniques is that the absolute trajectory and relative timing data are collected together on the same sensor  without  any  additional  hardware.  The  LC shutter is required to chop the meteor trail for velocity data; modulating it according to a de Bruijn sequence provides  the  absolute  timing  without  requiring  the integration,  synchronisation  and  calibration  of additional  sensor  subsystems.  This  simplification allows the production of much smaller, lighter, lower power  and  more  economical  meteor  cameras  than previously possible. Timing  precision:  A  microcontroller  ensures  the exposure start time and the LC shutter waveforms are synchronised  with  UTC  via  a  GPS  module.  This module  is  accurate  to  within  a  few  tens  of nanoseconds. The shutter opens regularly every 0.1 s and closes either 0.02 s later for a short '0' dash or 0.06 s later for a long '1' dash. This system therefore enables sub-millisecond,  absolute  timing  resolution  during fireball  entry.  This  level  of  precision  allows reliable velocities  to  be  calculated.  The  deceleration  of  a meteoroid is essential for determining its mass during bright  flight  with  such  a  simple  system,  and subsequently  any  potential  fall  locations.  Although only  relative  timing  is  required  for  meteorite  fall predictions,  the  absolute  start  time  of  the  luminous trajectory is required for accurate determination of preatmospheric  entry due  to  the  spin  of  the  Earth.  The sub-millisecond precision offered by the DFN cameras is  well  in  excess  of  the requirements  for  calculating meaningful orbits. Example meteor: A meteor was captured over South Australia  by  three  DFN  camera  systems  on  26 September 2014 at  16:42:2.80 UTC. Figure 1 shows the  dashes  in  the  fireball  trail  from  the  de  Brujin shutter sequence. Decoded timings are from the start of the exposure and some examples are given in the inset. The beginning of the de Bruijn sequence used is shown at the bottom, with the inset section highlighted. The altitude and azimuth of the start and end points of the fireball dashes are determined on each of the images and after calibration, triangulation software determines their  absolute  latitude,  longitude  and  height.  This fireball entered the atmosphere at 135.620° E, 28.529° S, with a height of 75.93 ± 0.15 km. Its entry velocity was 16.6 ± 1.3 km/s  and its very shallow angle (~9° from  the  horizontal)  meant  that  although  the  total duration was 6.68 s, it only penetrated 15.4 km into the atmosphere, ending with a velocity of 15.2 ± 1.3 km/s. At the end of  the fireball's  bright  flight  (135.51° E, 27.77° S) the angle to the horizontal had reduced to ~7°.  Orbital  parameters  were  also  obtained  for  this event using the absolute entry time decoded from the sequence. Summary: The combination of a liquid crystal shutter modulated by a de Bruijn sequence and synchronised via GPS makes it possible to record absolute trajectory timing  data  within  a  long  exposure  image  without additional hardware. This enabled the development of a  smaller,  simpler  and  more  economical  meteor observatories  than  previously  possible.  The implementation  allows  the  calculation  of  fireball trajectories with very precise timing data coupled with the  high  spatial  resolution  of  36  megapixel  image sensors.  The  low  per  system  cost  and  ease  of manufacture of the automated observatories has driven rapid growth of the DFN to 30  stations covering ~1.5 million km2. We are currently developing a simple 'kit' system,  based  on  this  technology,  that  will  allow colleagues  and  interested  amateurs  to  make  high resolution  fireball  observations  at  low  cost,  see http://www.fireballsinthesky.com.au for details. References: [1] Ceplecha, Z. (1961) BAC 12, 21. [2] Bland P. A. et al. (2012) AJES, 59, 177-187. [3] Ceplecha, Z. et al. (1959) BAC 10, 147. [4] Halliday I. et al. (1978) JRASC 72, 15-39. [5] Ceplecha, Z. et al. (1959) BAC 10, 204. [6] Spurny P. et al. (2001) Meteroids 2001, ESA-SP 495, 135-140. [7] Olech J. et al. (2006) IMC XXIV, 1, 53-62. [8] Andreic, Z. and Segon, D. (2010) IMC XXVII, 1, 16-23. [9] Jenniskens P. et al. (2011) Icarus, 216, 1, 40-61. [10] de Bruijn, N. G. and Erdos, P. (1946) KNAW, 49, 758-764. Figure 1: Trajectory with decoded de Bruijn sequence 