1751.PDF
Evidence for localized high temperature hydrothermal fluid flow within the sub-crater environment of the Rochechouart impact structure: observations from a polymict breccia dike S. L. Simpson1, P. Lambert2, M. R. Lee1.  1University of Glasgow, University Ave, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, UK.  2Sciences et Applications, 218 Boulevard Albert 1er, 33800 Bordeaux, France. S.Simpson.1@Research.gla.ac.uk  .       Introduction: Hypervelocity impacts into volatilebearing  terrestrial  targets  can  initiate  hydrothermal circulation for a finite period of time; evidence for this is  preserved  in  approximately  one-third  of  impact structures on Earth [1, 2]. Hydrothermal environments can host extremophile life, and microbial communities have been found to colonize impact craters [3, 4]. The majority of impact structures on Earth have yet to be studied in great detail; many aspects of the post-impact environment  such  as  the  extent  and  duration hydrothermal  circulation  with  respect  to  location within the structure as well as crater diameter,  target composition and external influences, (paleogeography) are  not  fully  understood.We  present  evidence  for  high  temperature hydrothermal  fluid  circulation  within  the  sub-crater environment  of  the  highly  eroded,  23km  diameter, Mesozoic  Rochechouart  impact  structure  located  in west-central France [5]. This evidence is a new impact lithology  that  was  found  during  a  recent  field campaign  at  a  collection  site  located  approximately 7.5km north-east of the structure's center. It is a highly porous, polymict lithic impact breccia dike containing carbonate  mineralization  found  below  the  transient crater  floor.  Secondary  hydrothermal  mineral assemblages are diagnostic of a range of temperatures (>100°C  to  low  temperature  diagenetic).    The Rochechouart impact structure:   The highly eroded Rochechouart impact structure has been dated to 201±2 Ma and is  located on the western border of the  Central-Massif  and  north-eastern  edge  of  the Aquitaine basin [5, 6]. The target consists of plutonic and  metamorphic  granitic  basement  rocks  of  the Variscan orogeny. Despite being highly eroded, a full suite  of  impactites is  preserved at  Rochechouart  [5]. The  rocks  represent  a  continuum  of  transitional lithologies,   ranging from clast-poor, vesicular impact melt rock to autochthonous, shock-fractured basement [5, 7]. Rochechouart impactites are primarily granitic in  composition,  consistent  with  the  geology  of  the target.  Post-impact  hydrothermal  alteration: hydrothermal alteration is a feature of Rochechouart, and has been reported by previous authors [1, 5-8]; Kmetasomatism is the most pervasive and has affected all  impactites  at  various  levels.  Other  pervasive secondary mineral assemblages are argillic and oxide, and  locally,  carbonate  and  sulphide.  Rochechouart  lithic  impact  breccias:  Lithic breccias are preserved in a variety of settings within Rochechouart.  These  breccias  contain  a  mixture  of angular  to  sub-angular  basement  fragments  within  a melt-free, fine to medium grained clastic matrix, and can  be  found  as  both  polymict  and  monomict.  The breccias  form  either  continuous  (allochthonous)  or discontinuous (parautochthonous) units, and localized breccia  dikes  above  and  below  the  transient  crater floor, respectfully [5]. Figure 1: SEM (EDX) chemical map of reaction rim of polymict breccia  dyke  clast,  showing  K-feldspar-rich  outer  rim  (left,  pink area)  and  Al-rich,  K  and  Si-depleted,  altered  interior  (right,  dark area).Figure 2: SEM image of  alteration texture of  quartz grain within matrix  of  polymict  impact  breccia  dike, Polymict lithic breccia dike: setting: A polymict lithic breccia dyke was found at a study site located 7.5 km north east of the structure's center directly beneath the transient  crater  floor,  at  Champagnac  quarry;  it  is intruded into autochthonous basement rock and has a width ranging from 1 to 5m. The site where this dyke was  found  showcases  the  complexities  involved  in impact  cratering  at  the  basement-crater  cavity interface; within only tens of meters laterally, we find outcrops  of  polymict  lithic  breccia  dyke,  monomict lithic  breccia,  autochthonous  basement  and pseudotachylite. Approximately 10 meters above this, 1751.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
is the continuous unit of polymict lithic breccia from where  this  dyke  is  believed  to  have  originated. Lithologic description: A mixture of  angular clasts of country  rock  are  found  within  a  fine-grained  clastic matrix containing coarse to fine-crystalline secondary carbonates  and  bright  red,  coarse  crystalline  Kfeldspar.  Clast  descriptions  are  as  follows:  (i)  darkgrey,  angular,  2  to  3cm clasts  of  amphibolite  gneiss displaying high temperature reaction rims of dark red K-feldspar (figure 1 and 3),  (ii)  light-grey,  2 to 4cm sub-angular  clasts  of  granitic  plutonic  and metamorphic  basement,  also  displaying  high temperature  dark  grey-red  reaction  rims,  with phyllosilicate-rich interiors and (iii) 5mm to 1cm subangular quartz grains.Figure 3: Photo of clean-cut face of polymict lithic breccia dyke.  The matrix is locally porous, and consists of a mixture of fine-grained, light grey to pale green clastic material with 2 to 3mm grains of bright red K-feldspar and  dark-grey  basement  amphibolite,  and  coarse  to fine-crystalline  dolomite  cement.  SEM  chemical analysis of the matrix shows Fe and Mn-rich dolomite cement  with  localized  overgrowths  of  smectite  clay. Both  matrix  and  clasts  show  varying  levels  of chloritization  and  K-metasomatism,  and  localized growth  of  Fe-sulphides.  Quartz  grains  within  matrix also display a unique alteration texture not seen in any other  Rochechouart  impactites  (figure  2).     Discussion: The  example we  have  presented displays  characteristic  retrograde  alteration  patterns commonly observed in impact-generated hydrothermal systems  [1,  8].  The  secondary  mineralization  are suggestive  of  a  complex  cooling  history  over  an extended period of  time;  reaction rims on clasts  and pervasive chloritization suggest high temperatures (100 to 300°C),  and the cloudy centers  and clean rims of dolomite  cement  suggests  moderate  diagenetic temperatures  (≤60°C)  of  crystallization.  It  is  also important  to  note  the  high  porosity  of  these  rocks: melt-bearing  lithologies  of  Rochechouart  can  have very  low  porosity,  while  lithic  breccias  are  the opposite, making them ideal conduits for fluid flow. It is likely that this porosity difference is why we do not see  such  extensive  mineralization,  apart  from  Kmetasomatism,  within  melt-bearing  crater  fill  units. Heat  source: Secondary  alteration  within  this  dyke presents indirect evidence for high temperatures during the  post-impact  cooling  period.  This  is  a  localized occurrence;  surrounding  impactites  within  the  study site  do  not  reflect  the  same  temperatures.  As  this material  is  allochthonous,  sourcing  from  above  the crater floor,  it  is  likely the dominant heat  source for this alteration originates  from overlying melt-bearing units,  which  have  since  been  eroded. External  influences: The  paleogeography  of  Rochechouart  is complex; although impactite petrology clearly shows a primarily crystalline,  granitic  target,  the  impact  took place  near  a  coastal  marine  shoreline.  Further,  δ13C stable isotope analysis of dolomite and calcite cement found  within  monomict  lithic  breccia,  also  collected from this  site,  shows contribution from both organic and inorganic reservoirs, supporting the hypothesis that seawater  may  have  influenced  post-impact mineralization.  It  has  been  suggested  that  basement fractures may have extended to the nearby Mesozoic sea,  which  would  have  channelled seawater  to  the structure [9]. This hypothesis will be tested further by analyzing  stable  isotope  content  from  secondary carbonates  within  the  polymict  lithic  breccia  dyke.    Acknowledgements: Funding for this research was generously provided by the Barringer Family Fund for Impact Research [10]. Thanks are also extended to the Reserve  for  assistance  during  field  work  and permission  to  collect  [11].    References: [1] Osinski, G. R. et al. (2013) Icarus  224,  347–363  [2]  Naumov,  M.  (2005)  Geofluids  5,  p165 to 184. [3] Sapers, H. et al. (2014) GSA Release No.  14-28  [4]  Parnell,  J.  et  al  (2012)  International  Journal of Astrobiology, 11 (2): 93–101. [5]  Lambert, P. (2010) The Geological Society of America Special  Paper 465. [6] Schmeider, M. et al. (2010) Meteoritics  & Planetary Science 45, Nr 8, 1225–1242 [7]  Sapers, H.  et  al (2009)  40th Lunar  and  Planetary  Science  Conference  #128.  [8]  Sapers,  H.  et  al  (2014) Meteoritics and Planetary Science 49, Nr 12, 2152 -  2168.  [9]  Lambert,  P.  and  Goderis,  S.  (2014),  Meteoritics  and Planetary Science  Volume 49,  Issue s1. A5-A454. [10] Barringer Crater Company, PO Box 697, Flagstaff, AZ 86002-0697  [11] Réserve Naturelle  de l'Astroblème de Rochechouart - Chassenon, CCPM Mairie-Place-du-Chateau,  87600, Rochechouart, France.1751.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
