1752.PDF
Figure 2:  Band constrast image and phase map of a RMN hosted within a spinel in a CAI of Vigarano. Figure 1: Band contrast image of and euler orientation image of a RMN hosted within a akermanite grain within a CAI of ALH 77307 TRANSMISSION KIKUCHI DIFFRACTION APPLIED TO PRIMITIVE GRAINS IN METEORITES.  L. Daly1, P. A. Bland1, P. W. Trimby2, S. Moody2, L. Yang2 and S. P. Ringer2, 1Department of Applied Geology, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA, 6845, Australia. E-mail luke.daly@postgrad.curtin.edu.au, 2Australian Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis and ARC Centre of Excellence for Design in Light Metals, The University of Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.   Introduction:  Transmission Kikuchi diffraction (TKD) is a relatively new technique in electron microscopy utilizing the transmission capabilities of scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) to analyse focussed ion beam (FIB) prepared transmission electron microscope (TEM) lamellae. This technique can analyse grains in the 10nm size range, which is an increase in resolution from standard electron back scatter diffraction (EBSD) of at least an order-of-magnitude [1,2]. TKD also provides detailed information on the crystallography, orientation and composition variations across the whole section, not just in a small region as in standard TEM analysis.  This is particularly useful in the analysis of matrix grains in primitive meteorites and IDPs which can often be ~100nm across. Here we illustrate its effectiveness applied to micron-scale Refractory Metal Nuggets (RMNs).  Methodolgy: FIB sections containing RMNs were extracted from the meteorites Allende, ALH 77307, and Vigarano using the Zeiss Auriga FIB-SEM at the 1752.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Figure 3: Euler orientation map of a section across a chondrule, chondrule rim and matrix from the Allende meteorite along with plots showing the olivine rotation axes taken from three distinctly different textural regions of the rim and matrix. Australian Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (ACMM), Sydney. The RMN from Allende is hosted within a chondrule sulphide, and the RMNs from ALH 77307 and Vigarano are hosted within Ca-Al rich inclusions (CAIs). Also a section across a chondrule, the chondrule rim and the surrounding matrix was taken. The FIB lamellae were then analysed using a Zeiss ULTRA Plus FEG SEM. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and TKD maps were collected simultaneously from each of the samples using a Nordlys-NANO EBSD detector and a X-Max 20mm2 SDD EDS detector using an accelerating voltage of 30kV. The maps were processed using the Oxford Instruments Aztec and Channel 5 software. Results: TKD analysis of these grains revealed some complex variations in terms of crystallography (see Figure 1) and mineralogy (see Figure 2) which were not apparent in SEM observations of the bulk sample prior to extraction; including the observation of twinning in several RMNs. The section across a chondrule, rim and matrix region indicates that the rotation axis within the forsterite olivine changes from rotation about the [001] axis in the matrix closest to the chondrule to rotation predominantly around the [100] and  [010] axis further away from the chondrule (see Figure 3).  Discussion: TKD allows mapping of TEM lamella at 10nm resolution and, while this does not compete with the atomic scale resolution possible with a TEM, it does allow us to observe subtle variations in tiny particles which may not be observed in the TEM due to the difficulty in orienting and tilting the sample into the desired orientation. It also allows us to observe differences in the crystallographic orientation of these grains both in relation to other grains and within the grain itself which is not directly possible with a TEM. The ability to use established software packages such as Aztec and Channel 5 means that the speed of data processing and interpretation is greatly enchanced. TKD is ideal for analysing internal variations in submicronsized grains which would not be possible to observe using conventional EBSD. Conclusion: Although it is a new microscopy technique, TKD is proving to be an excellent tool for the analysis of sub-micron grains in meteorites, as our initial results from RMNs indicate. Observing nm-scale structures within micron-scale nebular and pre-solar grains would give us a new perspective on the formation and subsequent processing history of these primitive materials. References: [1] Trimby P. W. (2012) Ultramicroscopy 120, 16-24. [2] Trimby P. W. et al. (2014) Acta Materialia 62, 69-80.  Acknowledgements:  This work was funded by the Australian Research Council via their Australian Laureate Fellowship program. The authors acknowledge the facilities and the scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Australian Centre for Microscopy & Microanalysis at the University of Sydney. 1752.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
