1829.PDF
Regional Geomorphology of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko using the OSIRIS camera Onboard Rosetta   M. R. El-Maarry1,  N. Thomas1, L. Giacomini2, M. Massironi2, M. Pajola3 and the OSIRIS team*. 1Physikalisches Institut, Sidlerstr. 5, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland (Mohamed.elmaarry@space.unibe.ch). 2Dipartimento di Geoscienze, University of Padova, via G. Gradenigo 6, 35131 Padova , Italy. 3Centro di Ateneo di Studi ed Attivitá Spaziali, "Guiseppe Colombo" (CISAS), University of Padova, Italy.  Introduction:  The OSIRIS camera [1] onboard the Rosetta spacecraft has been acquiring images of the comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko (67P/C-G)'s nucleus since Aug 2014 [2]. These images have yielded unprecedented insight into the morphological diversity of the comet's surface [3]. This paper presents an overview of the comet's geomorphology. In addition, we introduce the nomenclature that has been assigned to well-defined regions on the surface, which is adopted by all papers from the OSIRIS team.  In total, 19 regions have been identified so far with more expected to be added when the currently dark parts of the surface are illuminated later in the mission. The boundaries of the different regions were defined at sharp changes in surface morphology (e.g., rough vs smooth surface) or clear structural/topographical boundaries (e.g., ridge or edge of a depression). In accordance with the general theme of the Rosetta mission in using ancient Egyptian names, the regions were given the names of ancient Egyptian deities. Methods: The OSIRIS camera [1] consists of a narrow-angle camera (NAC) designed for the mapping of the comet's surface in high spatial resolution with combination of 12 filters covering the spectral range of 250-1000nm, and a wide-angle camera (WAC), which is optimized for the gas and dust studies in the vicinity of the comet with a combination of 14 filters in the spectral range of 240-720nm. In this study, we use images acquired from the time of first orbit insertion (Aug 6, 2014) to Dec 25, 2014. The image resolutions for the NAC varied during this time period from ~2 m/px to 0.17 m/px while the WAC varied from ~12 m/px to 1 m/px depending on the distance to the nucleus (~120¬~10 km). During the early mapping phase, the NAC images were predominantly used. However, as the mapping progressed and Rosetta moved to closer orbits around the nucleus, WAC images were gradually utilized with the NAC providing extremely high spatial resolution yet with small spatial coverage. Results:  We have identified 19 regions on the currently illuminated surface of comet 67P/C-G using images from the OSIRIS camera (Fig. 1 and 2). Since ~30% of the comet surface is currently in shadow, yet expected to be illuminated in later phases of the mission, it is expected that more regions will be added or refined. The regions fall into 5 broad categories:  Fig. 1. [top] NAC image of comet 67P/C-G showing many of the regions currently defined. [bottom] Same image with regional boundaries and nomenclatures added.   Consolidated regions represent the most common region type on both lobes. Most of these regions show variable degrees of fracturing [4], which include irregular, polygonal, oriented or potentially structurally controlled, and even rectilinear fractures as in the case of Hathor [5]. The ubiquitous presence of fractured materials on the surface of the comet is of paramount significance for a body that displays very low bulk density, which may indicate certain heterogeneity between different parts of the comet. Consolidated re1829.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
gions on the comet are either fully exposed, partially buried by dust or enclose smooth terrains. "Brittle" units: are weakly consolidated materials showing signs of mechanical failure and talus-like deposits as opposed to more competent or strongly consolidated materials, which are mainly located in the Seth region and Babi on the body lobe and to a much lesser extent in Bastet in addition to limited exposures beneath Ma'at on the head lobe. The brittle terrains show a high concentration of circular pits, and masswasting deposits in alcove-like features in addition to layered outcrops.    Fig. 2. Different viewing geometry showing additional regions.  Smooth terrains mainly encompass the Imhotep (not shown in figures, borders Khpery, Aten and Ash) and Anubis regions on the body lobe, and Hapi in the neck region. However, other regions show patches or isolated areas of smooth deposits such as Khepry. The regions are generally covered with smooth deposits that show variable degree of lateral mobilization such as dune-like features. They occasionally contain many boulders and may represent areas of current or past prolonged activity. Dust-covered regions: These are regions that are covered by fine-grained materials that are occasionally bellow the resolution limit of OSIRIS. They mainly encompass the Ash and Ma'at regions although variable and isolated patches of dust are observed in other regions as well such as Seth and Babi on the body lobe, and Anuket and Maftet on the head lobe. The boundaries of Ash and Ma'at are usually gradational as the dusty coating gradually thins out, which is strongly suggestive of an airfall-like mechanism for the deposition of the dust, most probably linked to surface activity. In many locations in these regions, outcrops of underlying materials are exposed, which morphologically resemble consolidated materials in the case of Ma'at and brittle materials in the case of Ash. Irregularly-shaped depressions: The surface of the comet currently displays three large depressions: Hatmehit and Nut on the head lobe, and Aten on the body lobe. Their interiors are mostly filled with masswasting or talus-like deposits, yet generally lack dusty covers. This trend is particularly noticeable in Aten, which is surrounded by dust-covered terrains. The three depressions display sizes, shapes, and depth-todiameter ratios that are difficult to reconcile with an impact hypothesis and may represent locations of massive outbursts of activity, collapse or other endogenic processes.  References: [1] Keller, H.U. et al. (2007), Space Science Reviews, 128, 433-506 . [2] Sierks, H. et al (2015), Science, in press. [3] Thomas, N. et al. (2015), Science, in press. [4] El-Maarry et al., this meeting. [5] Marchi, S. et al., this meeting.  Additional Information: *The OSIRIS team is H. Sierks, C.Barbieri, P. L. Lamy, R. Rodrigo, H. Rickman, D. Koschny, H. U. Keller, J. Agarwa, M. F. A'Hearn, F. Angrilli, A-T. Auger, M. A. Barucci, J-L. Bertaux, I. Bertini, S. Besse, G. Cremonese, V. Da Deppo, B. Davidsson, M. De Cecco, S. Debei, C. Güttler, S. Fornasier, M. Fulle, O. Groussin, P. J. Gutierrez, S. F. Hviid, W-H. Ip, L. Jorda, J. Knollenberg, J.-R. Kramm, E. Kührt, M. Küppers, L. M. Lara, M. Lazzarin, J. J. Lopez Moreno, S. Marchi, F. Marzari, H. Michalik, G. Naletto, N. Oklay, A. Pommerol, F. Preusker, L. Sabau, F. Scholten, C. Tubiana, J-B. Vincent, K-P. Wenzel. 1829.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
