1915.PDF
ROCHECHOUART AS NATURAL IMPACT LABORATORY: A REVIEW.  P. Lambert, Sciences & Applications, Bd Albert 1er, 33800 Bordeaux, France. E-mail: lambertbdx@numericable.fr.  Introduction:  The planetary importance of impact as a natural process is well acknowledged today, but the recognition and studies of impacts are very recent. Fundamental aspects such as how large impacts get their final shape are still not well understood. Also we are still at the onset of discovering and evaluating major incidences such as emergence of life both in the Early Earth and on other Planetary Bodies. Research on the above mentioned issues has focused so far on theoretical approaches and mathematical models. These need to be constrained and validated by ground truth data. In that frame, terrestrial impacts are and will remain by far the most accessible data reservoir. This reservoir is certainly "under studied", and within this reservoir, some objects are definitely "under studied". It is precisely the case of Rochechouart.  Bibliographical record: Since Rochechouart has been recognized as an eroded impact structure in 1969 [1] only 32 full length papers have been published in peer review literature. The number drops to 22 for publications exclusively devoted to Rochechouart, 25 when including the 3 University thesis on the structure. For comparison, volume 75 of Geologica Bavarica (1977) alone contains 34 full length papers on Ries. On Rochechouart, combined geological, geophysical and geochemical studies represent only 1/3rd of the bibliographical record dominated by specific investigations (age, projectile contamination and shock related studies). What makes Rochechouart so interesting:  Rochechouart is among the most accessible impact sites of its size on Earth. It is located in a politically stable country close to two international airports (1 and 2 hours drive respectively). A very dense array of farms and tiny villages is so that any place within the whole impact structure is never more than a few hundred meters from a road or a trail accessible by car. Relief is smooth, no step cliffs, no lakes, no big cities masking the record. Erosion has removed all the material that covered the impact deposits in the crater [2,3]. Later cut thru river valleys gives access to the full sequence of fall back ejecta, including late fine grained deposits (impactoclastites) [3-5] down to below the crater floor, in a zone equivalent of the whole inner crater at Ries, although about twice larger [3,5]. Rochechouart is just explored and essentially all detailed study remains to be done. Fundamental issues needing special attention include: 1- Size of the original crater: The official 23 km [6] is known to have no phenomenological signification [3,5] relating to the size of the structure as set some 40 years ago from shock studies and preliminary gravimetric investigations [2,7]. The initial crater must have been larger. Recent work by [8] agrees with the 40-50 km diameter proposed earlier by [3]. 2-Position of the center of the crater: The largest coherent melt-rich impactite occurring at Montoume is interpreted by [8] as the center of the crater, 6 km south of the center admitted so far from the distribution of shock in both the target and the breccia deposit [2] and from preliminary gravimetric studies [7]. Points 1 and 2 call for combined detailed gravimetric, petrographic and micro-meso-tectonic studies outside the breccia deposits where most of the research has been focusing until today. Studies should cover at least a 50 km zone centered on the current breccia deposit and extend up to the border with the Mesozoic deposits at the western margin of the continent at the time of impact. 3-Age and projectile identification issues: These have been controversial, accounting for about 40% of the total literature on Rochechouart. It is particularly stringent for age as the most robust data as of today makes the impact concomitant with Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction [5,9]. 4Representativity? The Rochechouart crater floor is known to be extremely flat [1,3,5] and shock below the crater floor is highly variable at all scales [2]. These features depart from the general figure we have for the wide majority of impact craters on planetary surfaces resulting from "single" projectile collision. Could Rochechouart be an exception? The hypothesis of a tight cluster of projectiles resulting in a single flat crater has been raised [10], yet never addressed. Comparing the terrestrial record with other planetary surfaces, the probability for such a case in a population of 185 objects tends towards 0. One can then ask if it is not the current understanding of impact crater floor geometry at large impact that need to be revised, or at least amended. Rochechouart happens to be the only case in the terrestrial record, where complete detailed geometry and petrology of the readjusted crater floor is readily exposed. All of what we know from elsewhere, comes from drillings, from geophysics or from theory. It is far to be as precise and "real" as what is exposed in the field at Rochechouart. 5-The apparent deficit of deposits within the crater [3,5], 6-The origin and distribution of impactoclatites [4-5], 7- The incidence of the littoral setting of the impact on its characteristics and the potential for enhanced pyroclastic activity due to sea water intrusion at the bottom of the crater [5], 8The distal consequences [9]. Beyond local issues, several fundamental issues common to the whole impact and meteorite community are particularly well ad1915.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
dressed at Rochechouart: A-Thermal evolution and fluid behavior of impact structures: This is of critical importance in the context of their possible influence on emergence of life both in the Early Earth and on other Planetary Bodies. This is largely related to hydrothermal mechanisms at work during the cooling of the hot materials produced and deposited inside impact craters. Yet most of the research in this field is focused on theoretical approaches and mathematical models [11]. Within the terrestrial reservoir, only one third of the 185 impact sites currently identified on Earth are sufficiently large to have initiated an hydrothermal cell similar to that advocated for producing water lakes on large Planetary bodies including Mars and the Early Earth. Within that population, essentially all are either too young and not eroded enough (such as Ries or Chesapeake Bay) or too old and too eroded to expose the material needed to constrain the key processes of temperature evolution and water availability at a large impact site. To do so, continuous 3D access to material at/across the crater floor limit is required. It must cover the hot impact melt deposits above, down to autochthonous para-autochthonous target below, with preference to crystalline rocks target to enable planetary comparisons. Rochechouart precisely fits all these requirements and is also known for having developed the required hydrothermal cell [3,8,12]. B-Cratering mechanics: The mechanism(s) by which the material beneath transient crater is displaced over kilometers at the readjustment stage, as well as the figure on how this happens are still poorly constrained and only known from theory. Experiments are not able to reproduce these mechanisms and ground truth data have not yet been made available. Damage, fracturing and plastic deformation at all scales induced by the impact are indeed difficult to recognize and interpret at natural terrestrial sites, owing to convergence with features which are usually also present at the initial stage in the target. Yet this can be done, providing a wide access and detailed studies at and below the bottom of a large impact crater, as exposed at Rochechouart. C - Limitations of PGE inter-element correlations in identifying meteorite and projectile contamination: Phase chemistry of contamination carriers is poorly constrained in all these materials. Relative mobility of PGE during cooling and post impact history on planetary surfaces starts to be realized and calls for ground truth investigations. With the insurance that impact and post impact alterations have fully developed in Rochechouart and with a well established geochemical projectile overprint in all the crater fill deposits, including in the nonmelted materials [12], we have there an excellent opportunity for investigating the phase chemistry of projectile contamination carriers and characterization of faith of PGE in relation with cooling condition and hydrothermal alteration.   Ground truth data mining opportunities: The recent establishment of the Rochechouart Astrobleme as a protected area in the scheme of National Natural Reserve (NNR) and its collaterals [14] are providing the opportunity to use Rochechouart as a full scale laboratory for impact related studies on planetary surfaces. If sampling is now subject to prior approval by NNR, digging and excavating rocks is not prohibited, at the contrary. Yet it has to be flagged to NNR for conservative sampling. This way, NNR will progressively build up and curate a unique impact rock collection at the scale of the whole structure and counterbalance the limited outcropping due vegetal cover. To enable such a curatorial development the local authorities are installing on site a small dedicated "Research Center" comparable to "ZERIN" at Ries. This entity will handle the scientific management of the collected material and the exchanges with the scientific community at large encouraged to take advantage of these "on shelve" material for studies. Beyond passive sampling, NNR has set drilling the crater as the core of its new 5 years term management plan [14]. Budget foreseen would allow 300 m of cumulated cores. The number, depth and location of the drillings is planned to be tuned according to specifications of the scientists who will apply for getting samples. A call for expression of interest is open (form and information are available at centre-scientifique@rochechouart.com). An international advisory committee will survey both the drillings and the Research Center [14].    References: [1] Kraut F. (1969) Geologica Bavarica 61, 428-450. [2] Lambert P. (1977) Earth and Planetary Sci. Letters 35, 258-268. [3] Lambert P. (2010) GSA Special Paper 465, 505-541. [4] Lambert P. and Reimold W.U. (2009) MAPS 44, A-119. [5] Lambert, P. and Goderis, S. (2014) MAPS 49, Issue s1. Abstract #5182. [6] www.passc.net/ EarthImpactDatabase. [7] Pohl J. et al. (1978) Meteoritics 13, 601-604. [8] Sapers, H.M. et al. (2013) MAPS 49: 2152-2168. [9] Schmieder et al. (2010) MAPS 45: 1225-1242. [10] Lambert P. (1982) Meteoritics 17(4), 240-241. [11] Naumov, M. (2005) Geofluids 5, 165-184. [12] Lambert P. (1977) In Impact and Explosion Cratering, Roddy D.J. et al. edts, 449-460. [13] Lambert P. (1982) GSA Special Paper 190, 57-68; [14] Lambert P. et al. (2014) MAPS 49, Issue s1. Abstract #5171. 1915.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
