1925.PDF
OBSERVATION OF LUNAR NEUTRON ALBEDO DURING SOLAR CYCLE 24 USING LEND DATA.  A. B. Sanin1, I .G. Mitrofanov1, M. L. Litvak1, J. G. Bodnarik2, W. V. Boynton2, G. Chin3, L. G. Evans3,4, D. V. Golovin1, K. Harshman2, T. A. Livengood3,5, A. V. Malakhov1, M. I. Mokrousov1, T. P. McClanahan3, R. Z Sagdeev5, R. D. Starr3,6, A. Vostrukhin1, 1Space Research Institute, RAS, Moscow 117997, Russia, sanin@mx.iki.rssi.ru, 2Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, 3Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA, 4Computer Sciences Corporation, Lanham, MD 20706, USA, 5Space Physics Department, University Maryland, College Park, MD, USA, 6Catholic University of America, Washington DC, USA.  Introduction: The Sun is not a steady source of radiation and demonstrates quasi-periodic variations of its activity with an average period of 11 years. The variation in solar activity yields a number of important physical effects that impact the entire heliosphere. Some of these effects are important for human life, since variations of the solar wind and the interplanetary magnetic field in the Solar System may produce variations of geomagnetic field and the Van Allen radiation belts. Moreover, after strong Solar Coronal Mass Ejection events, global geomagnetic storms are possible.  Solar variability generates a strong modulation of the Galactic Cosmic Ray (GCR) flux inside the heliosphere and results in modulating neutron emission from the Moon (neutron albedo) and other celestial bodies that lack a strong global magnetic field. Observation of the lunar neutron albedo and its variability are important for future human missions on the Moon since it provides understanding of the radiation environment on the surface and in the subsurface. Method: The Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) is presently operating on-board the NASA Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) that has orbited the Moon since July 2009. The primary objective of the LEND experiment is to detect hydrogen-bearing volatiles within the upper ~1 m of the lunar regolith with high spatial resolution [1,2]. This is accomplished by performing neutron remote sensing using the LEND instrument’s collimated detectors of epithermal and fast neutrons, and uncollimated detectors of thermal and epithermal neutrons. For our analysis, we have selected the LEND collimated and omnidirectional epithermal neutron detector data gathered for the period from September 2009 up to present. This period covers the first half of Solar Cycle 24 from the period of minimum solar activity with maximum GCR flux provided maximum lunar neutron albedo, up to high solar activity with less GCR flux and smaller neutron albedo. LEND data was averaged in approximately two week time intervals. This approach helps to suppress regional variations of the neutron counting rate, because each data point on the resulting time profile corresponds to an average that spans the lunar globe.  We have compared LEND measurements with ongoing observations of GCR variability by neutron detectors on-board other spacecraft orbiting Earth (BTN/ISS) and Mars (HEND/Odyssey) as shown in Figure 1.  The High Energy Neutron Detector (HEND) onboard the Mars Odyssey Mission [3,4,5] is a part of the Mars Odyssey Gamma Ray Spectrometer suite used to map the Martian neutron albedo, study the distribution of subsurface water/water ice, and monitor the Martian seasonal cycles. We monitor the Solis Planum region known to be hydrogen stable during seasonal H2O and CO2 cycles, and is considered as the best reference area to monitor long-term variations of the neutron flux due to the instability of GCRs and the occurrence of solar particle events. The Odyssey started the mapping phase of its mission in February 2002 and continues to the present day, providing the longest period of operations for neutron monitors flown in space (shown by red on top plot in Figure 1).  The Board Telescope of Neutrons (BTN) [6] is installed outside the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS). It is based on HEND’s flight spare unit was suggested to be used onboard the ISS to monitor the neutron component of the radiation background.  BTN began operations on-board the ISS in February 2007. High-energy charged particles of GCRs are able to propagate through the Earth’s magnetic field, produce neutrons in the Earth’s atmosphere and the massive body of ISS. Time profiles of neutrons measured above regions with high North and South geomagnetic latitudes show maximal amplitude variations. These data are marked in blue on the top plot in Figure 1. It is interesting to compare ground-based and space-based observations. We have added an example of the ground based observations of GCR variations to the bottom graph in Figure 1. We selected data of the US Antarctic station McMurdo’s neutron monitor that has continuously operated since the 1950s. Its location 1925.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
is favorable for observing modulations of the low energy part of the GCR spectrum during several solar cycles. Results: Neutron monitors installed on different space missions near the Earth, Moon and Mars show similar global trends and temporally localized GCR flux variations corresponding to solar activity. The global decrease of the neutron flux observed by all LEND detectors reflects the decrease of GCRs due to their modulation in the first part of the Solar Cycle 24. For the observed time interval, the amplitude of neutron flux decreases by a factor of ~1.7. The highest amplitude of variation (factor of ~1.8) and sharpest rise and decay of the maximum of the neutron counting rate is observed by HEND in Martian orbit. Both LEND and BTN data show a flatter response shape for the maximum and somewhat lesser amplitude variation (1.7 and 1.6 times, correspondingly). The peak of the Martian neutron flux occurred a couple of months earlier than was detected in the vicinity of the Earth and the Moon - October 2009 for HEND and December 2009 for LEND and BTN. The global and local trends of the McMurdo monitor’s counting rate are similar to trends in data from the space-based neutron spectrometers – LEND, HEND and BTN.  The flat response of the maximal counting rate peak at the McMurdo monitor data is similar to the BTN observations but it demonstrates very low amplitude variations (~1.2 times less than the BTN observations) and occurs during the same time frame as observed from Martian orbit. A possible explanation of observed differences is that in orbit around the Moon, the detection of neutron albedo is produced by direct bombardment of GCR particles with the lunar subsurface, without the influence of an atmosphere or a strong magnetic field. In orbit around the Earth, due to the very thick atmosphere, the observed neutron flux is only produced in the Earth’s upper atmospheric layers or in the massive body of ISS. In the case of Martian orbital measurements, the thin Martian atmosphere produces three effects: 1) GCR flux generates secondary neutrons in the atmosphere which may be detected by neutron detectors in orbit, 2) the atmosphere alters the GCR flux incident to the Martian surface, and, 3) the atmosphere alters the neutron flux that propagates from the regolith to orbit. The McMurdo neutron monitor measures secondary neutrons that are not produced primarily by GCR particles, but are instead produced in an atmospheric cascade (air shower) resulting from the primary GCR impacts.   We contrast that the evidence of similarities and differences in the GCR flux behavior, using Earthbased neutron monitor and neutron detectors flown on various space missions.  Our analysis reveals new patterns and provides a multi-dimensional view of the solar modulation of GCRs. References: [1] Mitrofanov I. G. et al. (2008) Astrobiology, 8(4), 793-804. [2] Mitrofanov I. G. et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev., 150(1–4),183–207, doi:10.1007/s11214-009-9608-4. [3] Mitrofanov I. G. et al. (2002) Science, 297, 5578, pp. 78-81. [4] Mitrofanov, I. G. et al. (2003) Solar System Research, 37, 5, pp. 366-377. [5] Boynton W. V. et al. (2004) Space Sci., Rev. 110, 37-83. [6] Tretyakov V. I. et al. (2009) EGU General Assembly, p. 8620.    Figure 1. The long term variations of neutron flux according to LEND/LRO (yellow), HEND/Odyssey (red) and BTN/ISS (blue) are shown on the top plot. The middle plot shows the variations of the neutron flux measured by the ground neutron monitor at the US Arctic station at McMurdo.  1925.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
