 DECODING THE HISTORY OF A LAYERED CHONDRULE THROUGH OLIVINE GRAIN ORIENTATION MEASUREMENTS USING EBSD. K. K. Hobart1, E. J. Crapster-Pregont2,3, and D. S. Ebel3, 2. 1Dept. of Geology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH, 44074 (khobart@oberlin.edu). 2Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, NY, 10964, USA (ellencp@ldeo.columbia.edu). 3Dept. of Earth and Planetary Sciences, American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY, 10024, USA (debel@amnh.org).  Introduction: Chondritic meteorites are known to be the most primitive rocks in the solar system. Understanding their formation is key to understanding the earliest stages of solar system chemistry and dynamics from the formation of the first solids to planet building. Acfer 139 is a Renazzo-type (CR2) carbonaceous chondrite find from the Sahara. This relatively unshocked and unweathered chondrite has large, distinct chondrules with highly variable concentrations of FeNi metal [1]. Layered chondrules in particular can provide a wealth of information about changing formation conditions because each igneous layer results primarily from an accretion and melting sequence. An extraordinary layered chondrule in Acfer 139 (AMNH 4793- t2-c1) was discovered by synchrotron micro-computed tomography (CT). CT scanning revealed three distinct concentric layers of metal with differing textures [2]. Serial sectioning and x-ray mapping revealed an olivine (Fo98) + mesostasis core (S1 in Fig 1) inside the innermost layer of fine metal grains (m1), with an olivine + opx + mesostasis layer (S2) outside the innermost metal layer, surrounded by a layer of platy metal (m2, Fig. 1), and so on. Initially, an ~80 micron section (t2-ps4B2) was examined optically to determine crystallographic relationships among olivine grains in layers S1 and S2. Here, we use the technique of electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD) to better quantify these relationships. We use this information to constrain formation hypotheses for this and other (albeit less dramatically) igneously layered chondrules in CR chondrites. Methods: EBSD provides quantitative, nondestructive determination of crystal orientation, and can be done on any highly-polished sample regardless of sample thickness. In addition, data can be easily gathered on multiple mineral phases at once, including isotropic and opaque crystalline forms. This is an advantage over the petrographic microscope.  Section t2-ps4B2 of (Fig 1) was mounted onto a 1inch round slide with Epothin epoxy-resin. Final polishing was done by hand with colloidal silica for 20min. For detailed EBSD polishing protocol see [3]. Using an EDAX EBSD detector on a Zeiss EVO 60 variable pressure SEM, the olivine crystals located in the center and across the first metal layer (m1) of the chondrule were mapped for their orientation based on their [001], [010], and [100] planes. The data was analyzed using EDAX OIM software. Error from nonolivine crystals, metal, or cracks was eliminated by combining the orientation map with the confidence index, a measure of the "quality" of the orientation measurement, in grayscale to create a grain map that reflects the orientations of the olivine crystals. Results: Orientation measurements by EBSD generally confirm preliminary optical data. The crystal orientations within the chondrule core (S1) confirm its Fig. 1: X-ray composite image of portion of c1, slice 4, side B2. Si = red, Ca = green, Fe = blue. Dashes mark metal layers. Red dots mark LA-ICPMS analysis spots. Fig. 2: Composite map of EBSD orientations in the chondrule core, the innermost metal layer (dashed oval), and parts of the second silicate layer. Color represents orientation as defined by the RGB key at bottom left. Red dots mark previous LA-ICPMS analysis spots.      origin as a barred olivine chondrule. Despite partial separation of the olivine plates into equant grains, their crystallographic continuity remains intact.  The thick olivine rim of the core (S1) has the same orientation as the inner olivine in the outer layer (S2) immediately outside the layer of fine metal grains [Figs. 1, 2]. In 3 dimensions, the sphericity of this fine innermost metal layer (m1) is striking, and this layer in all sections (and in CT) lies between the outer olivine of S1 and the inner olivine of S2.  Interpretation: CT analysis of the entire chondrule show a non-continuous but highly uniformly distributed sphere of many hundreds of small 5-50 m metallic grains surrounding the solid rim of the inner barred olivine chondrule. The inner chondrule has been annealed, but olivines remain mutually oriented.  EBSD analysis reveals that the S2 olivine just outside the fine metal sphere (m1) is epitaxial to the inner S1 olivine, suggesting that it grew on that olivine from a melt. Furthermore, the abundance of Ca-poor pyroxene in S2 increases outward. In this igneous layer (S2), olivine was the highest temperature mineral to crystallize. It did so epitaxially on the preexisting olivine of S1. There is no free metal in the inner core S1. The uniform distribution of myriad grains in m1 suggests their origin as a separate layer of grains, or dust later annealed, accreted to the S1 core. At least one melting event was required to form a liquid S2 layer (with a lower liquidus T than S1) from accreted silicate, and such an event would have annealed the S1 core, and coarsened the metal in layer m1. Layer m1 is superchondritic in Ni/Fe and Co/Fe, while m2 is chondritic, supporting decreasing T of solid stability relative to vapor outward from the chondrule core.  The core of this complex object was clearly a barred olivine chondrule. Our measurements of the entire sequence of layers is consistent with sequential accretion of successively more silica-enriched dust layers, followed by their flash melting. These four silicate layers are abruptly separated by three discrete metal-rich layers that are near-spherical in 3D. We infer that each of these layers accreted separately and that at least the silicate layers were heated in separate, rapid events. Layer m2, consisting of large plates of metal, was likely also heated in a separate event [3]. Discussion:  Our findings are inconsistent with hypotheses for metal rim formation on CR2 chondrules that invoke direct condensation of whole chondrules, reduction and desulfidation during heating [4], evaporation and recondensation of metal [4,5], or secondary melting and metal migration. None of these hypotheses addresses the particular relationship between layers S1, m1, and S2 documented here. The core barred olivine cooled far too quickly for it to be the source of metal layer m1. The FeO-poor layer S2 is surrounded by a thick layer of metal. Reduction [1,4-6] would have to have been extreme to source the m2 metal from S2. We do, however, observe decreasing liquidus temperatures (increasing silica) from core to rim of the entire object. We expect that the metal will contain increasing volatile siderophiles from m1 outward. Indeed, m1 metal is richer in Ni and Co than the m2 metal. Since the condensation temperatures of metal and Mg-rich olivine-bearing liquids are generally very similar, sequential equilibration of condensates with gas requires convoluted logic to explain this chondrule. This begs the question: What is the mechanism for separating metal from silicate at this scale? Conclusions: We do not argue for a particular mechanism for chondrule heating, but rather propose that a mechanism must exist that yields the textures and compositions we measure. Our results rule out a host of mechanisms, but are consistent with some of the interpretations of [6] and of [7]. They require separated populations of metal and silicate "dusts" which interact intermittently (accrete sequentially), and are flash heated in highly local events. Acknowledgments:  This research was supported by NASA grant NNX10AI42G (DSE), a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-11-44155) (ECP) and NSF REU grant 1004591N (KKH). References:  [1] Weisberg M.K. et al. (1993) GCA, 57, 1567-86. [2] Ebel, D.S., and M.R. Downen. (2011) Meteor. Planet. Sci. Suppl. 46:A62 (Abs. #5359, oral). [3] CrapsterPregont et al. (2015) this conf. (Abs. #1561). [4] Humayun M. et al. (2002) LPS XXXIII, Abs. #1965. [5] Kong P. et al. (1999) GCA, 63, 3673-82. [6] Wasson J.T. and Rubin A.E. (2010) GCA, 74, 2212-2230. [7] Ebel D.S. et al. (2008) Meteor. Planet. Sci., 43, 1725-1740. Fig. 3:  Orientation zones in the center of the chondrule overlaid onto a BSE image. Metal layer m1 is indicated by a white dashed line. Approximate boundaries of the EBSD orientation map are indicated by the black dotted line.  