 COHESION AND ELECTROSTATIC LOFTING OF ELLIPSOIDAL DUST GRAINS. A.J.DeCicco1 and C.M. Hartzell2,1Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Maryland (adecicco@mail.umd.edu) 2Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Maryland (hartzell@umd.edu) Introduction: In [1] cohesion is shown to be important in understanding the evolution of asteroid surfaces. Prior studies of the cohesion of regolith in the planetary environment have assumed spherical grains [2, 3, 4]. Discrete element method (DEM) models for the strength of rubble pile asteroids by [4] rely heavily on the assumption that grains are spherical particles to determine the cohesive force between them. The grains returned from the asteroid Itokawa by the Hayabusa missions are very angular [5]. Similarly, micrographs clearly show that grains on the Moon are highly aspherical [6]. We investigate the effect of non-spherical grains on cohesion. We approximate cohesion between irregular grains as cohesion between ellipsoids. The cohesive force between particles is calculated using the method given by [2]. The cohesion between ellipsoids is nondimensionalized by equal volume spheres. Expanding upon the work by [3], the electric field required for lofting particles on the Moon is calculated. We find that asphericity can modify the cohesive force by a factor of 1/3 to 4 and the electric field required for lofting by 1/2 to 2. Thus, models of asteroid strength and evolution will be affected by these new estimates of cohesion. Theory: Cohesion. The parametric equation for an ellipse is: x(t) = a · cos(t) (1) y(t) = b · sin(t) (2) where a and b are the major and minor axis, respectively, and t is the angle. The radius of curvature for a given parametric equation is: R = (x′2 + y′2)3/2 x′y′′− y′x′ (3) By differentiating Eqn 1 and Eqn 2 with respect to t, we may then obtain a radius of curvature of the ellipse: Re = (a2 sin2 t +b2 cos2 t)3/2 ab (4) We can rewrite this replacing the minor axis, b, with the relation, b = √a2(1− e2) where e is the eccentricity of the cross-sectional ellipse. Eccentricity ranges from 0 for a sphere to 1 for a parabola, with increasing values describing more 'needle-like' grains. Rewriting Eqn 4: Re = (a2 sin2 t +a2(1− e2)cos2 t)3/2 a√ a2(1− e2) (5) For cohesion between two grains, [2] showed that the reduced radius of curvature between two contacting bodies is proportional to the force required to separate them: Fco = A210/3z2 R1R2 R1 +R2 (6) where A is the Hamaker constant (4.3× 10−20 Joules from [7] for lunar regolith), z is the equilibrium distance (where the potential energy of the grain interaction is at a minimum) typically between 1 and 5 Å, and R1 and R2 are the local radii of curvature for bodies 1 and 2, respectively. Substituting Eqn 5 (the radius of curvature for an ellipsoid) into the expression for the cohesion (Eqn 6), we can calculate the cohesion between two ellipsoidal grains of varying size, shape, and relative orientation. We propose to characterize the magnitude of the variation in the cohesion for ellipsoidal grains as compared to the traditionally considered spherical grains. First, we compare the ellipsoids to spheres of the same volume. Since the ellipsoid and sphere have the same volume, the radius of the sphere can be defined in terms of parameters of the ellipse (a,e): Rs = a(1− e2)1/3 (7) We calculate the cohesion between two identical ellipsoids (Fcoe ∝ Re and R1 = R2) and two identical spheres (Fcos ∝ Rs). The ratio of the cohesion in ellipsoids to that of spheres is then: Fcoe Fcos =Re Rs (8) Using Eqn 5 and Eqn 7 where the radius of the sphere is by definition the radius of curvature, we produce the non-dimensional relation for cohesion of like ellipsoids in contact to their volume-equivalent spheres in contact: Fcoe Fcos =(1− e2 cos2 t)3/2 (1− e2)5/6 (9) Eqn 9 shows that the ratio between the cohesion in the ellipsoids and spheres is only dependent on the orientation of the ellipsoids and their eccentricity, but it is not dependent on the size of the particles. We define orientation of the ellipsoid at t = 0 to be an ellipse whose semi-major axis is along the x-axis of an xy plane thats origin is coincident to the ellipse's origin. An orientation of t = π/2 is an ellipse whose semi-minor axis is along the x-axis of the previously described plane. Electric Field. [3] shows that electrostatic dust lofting can occur if the electrostatic force is greater than the cohesion and gravity holding the grain on the surface: FE ≥ Fgrav +Fco (10)  where FE is the electric force (FE = E2Aε), A is the surface area of the grain, ε0 is the permitivitty of free space, E is the electric field required to loft a particle, Fgrav is the local surface gravity, and Fco is the cohesive force calculated in the last section. Expanding the electrostatic term: E ≥ √Fgrav +Fco Aε0 (11) The ratio of the electrostatic force required for lofting of the ellipsoidal grains as compared to the spheres is: Ee Es ≥√ As Ae √Fgrav +Fcoe Fgrav +Fcos (12) Note that Fgrav will be equivalent for the sphere and ellipsoid cases as we defined them to have equivalent volumes. Results: From Eqn 6, we find that the maximum cohesion will occur with a rotation of both bodies by π/2 with respect to the major axis (the contact point being at the semi-minor axis) and the minimum cohesion at a rotation of 0 (the contact point being at the semi-major axis). These two orientations bound the range of cohesive strengths for ellipsoids of a constant size. In Figure 1, we show the amplification of the cohesion between ellipsoids as compared to spheres (see Eqn 12). As eccentricity tends towards zero, the ellipsoids become more spherical and ratio of cohesive force approaches 1. Conversely, as eccentricity increases, the ellipsoid models will deviate from the circular case as they start to approximate plate-plate contacts. Figure 1 also represents the ratio of bond numbers, which is the strength of the cohesive force as related to gravity. Figure 1: Ratio of cohesion for two ellipsoids in contact as compared to two spheres in contact. As eccentricity increases the objects behave as plates in contact, as eccentricity decreases, they behave as spheres in contact (solid lines denote max cohesion orientation, dashed lines denote min cohesion orientation) Figure 2: Ratio of electric fields required for lofting for ellipsoids to spheres in contact (solid lines denote max cohesion case, dashed lines denote min cohesion case) The influence of grain shape on the electric field required to electrostatically loft grains is given by Eqn 12 and is shown in Figure 2. The electric field ratios for the min and max cohesion orientations approach a constant value at large grain sizes, where gravity dominates. Over the size domain, highly eccentric ellipsoids show significant deviation from the estimates of the sphere-sphere cohesion (see Figure 1). In Figure 2, highly eccentric ellipsoids require a weaker electric field than their sphere analogues in the gravity-dominated regime. To understand this we look at the non-dimensional electric field equation and investigate the ratio of surface areas. In the gravity dominated regime the amplification of the required electric field is dominated by the root ratio of surface areas. For our non-dimensional investigation, there is no difference between modeling our bodies as like spheres/ellipsoids or as the body-plate contacts where the plate is a fixed, rigid surface and the grain rests on it. Further investigation will calculate the cohesion between unlike ellipsoids in contact. Conclusion: Considering grains as ellipsoids instead of spheres modifies the cohesive force by a factor of 1/3 to 4 and the required electric field for lofting by 1/2 to 2. Geometry plays a significant role in these early estimates of cohesion and shows a need to consider more complex geometries of grains to characterize the surfaces of moons and asteroids. References: [1] Scheeres, D.J. et al. (2010) Icarus, 210, 968-984. [2] Castellanos A. (2005) Adv. in Phys., 54, 263-376. [3] Hartzell C.M. and Scheeres D.J. (2011) Planetary and Space Sci., 59, 1758-1768. [4] Sanchez, P. and Scheeres, D.J. (2014) Meteoritics & Planetary Sci., 49, 788-811. [5] Tsuchiyama, A. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 1125-1128. [6] Heiken G.H. et al. (1991) Lunar Sourcebook. [7] Perko H.A. (2001) J. Geotech. & Geoenv. Eng., 127, 371-384. 