2029.PDF
The Impact of a Regional Sea on Stresses on Enceladus. S. A. Johnston1 and L. G. Montési2, 1 Department of Geology, University of Maryland, College Park (johnston@umd.edu; montesi@umd.edu).   Introduction: South Polar Terrain: The most geological distinctive feature of the South Polar Terrain (SPT) on Enceladus are sub-parallel, linear depressions called tiger stripes The morphology of tiger stripes indicate extension. By contrast, the SPT is also bounded by a circumferential deformation belt, the Southern Curvilinear Terrain (SCT), that represents compression[1]. The plumes currently spewing icy materials into space probably originate at the tiger stripes. Thus,the SPT is a region of keen interest because of its astrobiological potential, and ability to provide insight into the interior and even history of Enceladus.  Figure 1. Image (PIA10360) of south polar terrain on Enceladus courtesy of NASA/JPL/GSFC/SwRI/SSI. Shows the nearly parallel orientation of the tiger stripes and deformation bounding the SPT.  The sources of stress typically proposes to explain the tectonic activity of the SPT and surrounding region are typically related to tidal activity. However, it is also known that tide stresses are currently moderate on Enceladus, which place the origin of tectonic activity to a different geological era. Here, we evaluate the alternative possibility that stresses responsible for tectonic activity are related to the crystallization of a regional sea underneath the SPT.  Both a global ocean [2,3,4] and a regional sea [5,6] have been proposed to exist beneath the ice shell of Enceladus to explain enhanced heat flux of the SPTand the origin of plumes. The presence of either will have important implications for the creation or focusing of stresses and deformation in the ice shell. Stresses within the ice shell can be the result of tidal stresses or geologic activity. If there is a regional sea on Enceladus it can either be positively pressurized (such as by crystallization) or negatively pressurized (if actively melting) relative to the hydrostatic pressure state. We developed a model that evaluates the stresses that could arise from the pressurization of a regional sea.  Model Setup: In order to evaluate the stresses and deformation predicted from a pressurized from a regional sea we built axisymmetric, finite element models using ABAQUS™. We built two ice shell geometries: a flat slab and a curved slab with a radius of 250 km. The far end and base of the ice shell are pinned in both model geometries. The ice shell is modeled as an elastic solid with a Young’s modulus of 0.9 GPa, and a Poisson’s ratio of 0.3. A pressure of 5 kPa was applied to the interface between the regional sea the surrounding ice.  This pressure is reasonable based on previous models for the crystallizing of a water body. In addition, the problem being linear, a simple rescaling of the stress magnitude and deformation is sufficient to discuss cases with difference overpressure. While the magnitude of the stresses in the ice shell are sensitive to the amount of pressure, the orientation of the stresses should not change with a change in the magnitude of pressure only. Three different regional sea geometries were tested with two located at the base of the ice shell. The basal regional sea geometries evaluated were  square (figure 2D) and domal (figure 2C). A regional sea isolated within the ice shell was also tested, and the ice cover above the sea was varied between 50 km (figure 2B) and 25 km (figure 2A). These variation are by no means an exhaustive study, but rather serve as the foundation for understanding the potential impacts of a regional sea location and geometry on deformation of the ice shell. Results: Figure 2 shows the magnitude and direction of maximum principal stress. Tensile failure is predicted to be perpendicular to the direction of the maximum principal stress if it exceed 20kPa. If no line is drawn in an element then the direction of the maximum principal stress is perpendicular to the page, and any failure would be circumferential. Curved vs Flat: Modeling a pressurized regional sea on a curved planet rather than a flat slab has interesteding implications for the magnitude and orientation of the maximum principal stress. 2029.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
The orientation of the maximum principal stress differs between these models. In the flat slab model the maximum principal stress is perpendicular to the page, corresponding to radial fractures propagating out from the entire edge of the regional sea.  However, with the same pressure, and sea depth, the curved planet model predicts the direction of maximum principal stress to be parallel to the page, corresponding to circumferential cracks at the surface above the pressurized ocean. These models also predict an upward propagating crack from the top corner of the sea. No compressive stresses are observed above the sea on the curved planet model, however they are predicted in a flat slab model.  Figure2.  The magnitude and orientation of the maximum principal stresses predicted by a range of models.  A,B,C,D show the area around a regional sea at the south pole.  For these images south is up and north is down.    Because the south polar terrain and presumably an underlying ocean is large relative to the radius of Enceladus, it is important to take into account the membrane stresses and curvature of the icy satellite. Modeling on a curved planet rather than a flat slab is expected to do better at predicting the orientation of the stresses as the geometry is more realistic. However these models are inconsistent with the interpretation of SCT as a compressive orogenic belt. Location of sea: Stresses and the likelihood of cracking are highest at the surface. As the regional sea becomes more shallow, tensile stresses increase and reach to greater depth. With only 25km of ice cover, the tensile failure is predicted to reach the regional sea, at which point the sea is a potential source for the water in the plumes of Enceladus. If the sea is deeper, the tensile stresses induced by the pressurized sea do not extend deep enough into the ice shell to reach the sea. Geometry of sea: The geometry of the regional sea impacts the magnitude and orientation of the stresses observed at the surface. When the regional sea has a curved contact with the overlying ice our model predicts that the direction of the maximum principal stress at the surface above the sea is parallel to the surface (figure 2C). If stresses were large it enough, this would create a downward propagating crack. However, if the interface between the sea and ice is parallel to the surface, then the orientation of the maximum principal stress in this same region is perpendicular to the surface (figure 2A,B,D). Any corners or tips within the ice shell create a location for stresses to be focused within the ice shell, and predict enhanced crackin in this area.  These geometries are meant to be a study of sensitivity of the stresses to the geometry of a global sea. Clearly the geometry of the regional sea is of key importance in our models and other geometries need to be tested. Conclusion: The presence and properties of a regional sea beneath the south polar terrain on Enceladus is expected to have a large impact on the stresses and therefore expected deformation of the surface in this region. Our current models predict extension in the SPT and the SCT. Cracks are initially oriented circumferentially in the SPT. The region of tension can reach the sea if it is buried by 25 km of ice or less. Tidal stresseslikely modify the state of stress in the SPT. However, pressurization of a regional sea can results in tensile tectonics and water plumes.  References: [1] Porco, C. C. et al. (2006), Science, 311, 1393-1401. [2] Ross, M. N., and Schubert G. (1989), Icarus, 78, 90–101. [3] Schubert G. et al. (2007), Icarus, 188, 345-355. [4] Nimmo, F. et al. (2007), Nature, 447, 289–291. [5] Collins, G. C., and Goodman J. C. (2007) Icarus, 189, 72–82. [6] Tobie, G. et al. (2008), Icarus, 196, 642-652.  Acknowledgement: This work is supported by the NASA Grant NNX10AG41G. 2029.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
