 Mass loss as a driving mechanism of tectonics of Enceladus Leszek Czechowski University of Warsaw, Faculty of Physics, Institute of Geophysics, ul. Pasteura 7,02-093Poland (lczech@op.pl/Fax: +48-225546882) Summary The mass loss from SPT is the main driving force of the following tectonic processes on Enceladus: subsidence of SPT, flow in the mantle and motion of plates. 1. Introduction Enceladus, a satellite of Saturn, is the smallest celestial  body  in  the  Solar  System  where  volcanic activity is observed. Every second, the mass of ~200 kg is  ejected  into  space  from  the  South  Polar  Terrain (SPT) - Fig. 1. - [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Figure 1: The jets from 'tiger stripes' in the South Polar Terrain on Enceladus (after NASA PIA10355). The  loss  of  matter  from  the  body's  interior should lead to global compression of the crust. Typical effects  of  compression  are:  thrust  faults,  folding  and subduction. However, such forms are not dominant on Enceladus. We propose here special tectonic model that could explain this paradox. 2. Subsidence of SPT and tectonics The volatiles  escape from the hot region through the fractures forming plumes in the space - Fig.1. The loss of  the  volatiles  results  in  a  void,  an  instability,  and motion of solid  matter  into the hot  region  to  fill  the void. The motion includes - Fig. 2: (i) Subsidence  of  the  'lithosphere'  of SPT. (ii) Flow of the matter in the mantle. (iii) Motion  of  plates  adjacent  to  SPT towards the active region. If  emerging void is being filled by the subsidence of SPT  only,  then  the  velocity  of  subsidence  is  ~0.05 mm·yr-1.  However,  all  three  types  of  motion  are probably  important,  so  the  subsidence  is  slower  but mantle  flow  and  plates'  motion  also  play  a  role  in filling the void. Figure 2: A scheme of suggested processes in the activity center (after [6]). Note that in our model the reduction of the crust area is not a result of compression but it is a result of the plate sinking.  Therefore  the compressional surface  features do not have to be dominant. 3. Models of subsidence The  numerical  model  of  suggested  process  of subsidence is developed. It is based on the typical set of equation:  Navier-Stokes  equation  for  incompressible viscous liquid, equation of continuity and equation of heat  conduction.  The  Newtonian  and  non-Newtonian rheologies  are  used.  The  preliminary  results  of  the model  indicate  that  the  the  subsidence  rate  of  ~0.05 mm·yr-1 is possible if we assume Newtonian rheology of the ice. For non-Newtonian rheology more probable value  is  ~0.01  mm·yr-1.  In  this  case  the  velocity  of motion of the 'mantle' material is higher.  4. Experimental model Fig. 3 presents the map of the STP (left hand part of the figure).  One  can  see  the  low  polygonal  region surrounded  by  the  characteristic  'arcs'.  In  the laboratory  model  we  observe  the  regular  pentagonal plate (model of STP) sinking in viscoelastic material. Its rheology corresponds to assumption that icy plates are warm enough to creep like glaciers. The right hand side of the Fig. 3 presents the situation 150 hours after beginning of sinking. The most of the plate is already covered by the material - the size of the plate is given by  the  yellow  double  arrow.  Note  'kinks',  that  are formed  above  vertices  of  the  plate.  Contrary  to expectations (the viscoelastic material behaves like the fluid for the considered time scale) these 'kinks' appear to  be stable  features.  This  fact  suggests  that  'plates' adjacent to the SPT could behave like a glaciers. Figure  3.  The  image  of  STP  (left  hand  side,  after NASA). Model of subsidence is on the right part of the figure. (after [6]).  5. Conclusions Our hypothesis  is  a natural  consequence  of observed mass loss. In our opinion this mass loss is a main factor driving tectonic motions. Of course, it does not exclude some form of solid state convection in the icy mantle, but in fact this convection is not needed. The time of operation of this form of tectonics is not known.  There  are  some  observations  suggesting  that the activity in the STP is now decreasing. The periodic changes  of  activity  are  possible.  Other  observations suggest  that  in  the  past  there  were  other  centers  of activity similar to the present STP [1]. The indication of the future activity centers is less certain. However, the ovoid-shaped depression up to 2 km deep, of size 200×140 km with the center  at  200E, 15S is a good candidate - Fig.4 [7, 8]. Acknowledgements The research is partly supported by National Science Centre (grant 2011/ 01/ B/ ST10/06653). References [1] Spencer, J. R.,  et al.  Enceladus: An Active Cryovolcanic Satellite,  in:  M.K.  Dougherty  et  al.  (eds.),  Saturn  from Cassini-Huygens, Springer Science, (2009), p. 683.  [2]  Kargel,  J.S.  Enceladus:  Cosmic  gymnast,  volatile miniworld. Science 311, 1389-1391 (2006). [3] Langenberg, H., Planetary science: Jets of mystery Nature Geoscience 1, 816 (2008) doi:10.1038/ngeo373. [4] Giese, B., and the Cassini Imaging Team. The topography of Enceladus. EPSC Abstracts Vol. 5, EPSC2010-675 (2010). [5]  Kargel,  J.S.  Enceladus:  Cosmic  gymnast,  volatile miniworld. Science 311, 1389-1391 (2006). [6] Czechowski, L., Tectonics of Enceladus (2013) submitted. [7]  Czechowski,  L.,  Enceladus  -  the  vanishing  satellite presenting in EGU 2014, Vienna. [8] Czechowski, L., Some remarks on the early evolution of Enceladus. Planet. Sp. Sc. 104, 185-199 (2014). Figure  4. Orange  arrows  show  the  arcuate  scarps  convex southward. Analogy with terrestrial subduction suggests that the polar plate is there subducted. Yellow arrows indicate two tiger  stripes.  Blue  dashed  line  shows  an  ovoid  depression which may be an activity center in the future. After [8]. 