2042.PDF
KEEPING UP WITH SPACE SCIENCE IN 2014 and 2015 AT THE MUSEUM OF SCIENCE, BOSTON.  E.R. O'Dea, Museum of Science Boston, eodea@mos.org   Introduction:  The Musuem of Science, Boston hosts over 1.5 million visitors each year. In the Current Science and Technology Department, we use live presentations and special events to cover breaking science news. What follows is a summary of our coverage of space science in 2014 and a look ahead to 2015. Year of the Comet: 2014 had many newsworthy  comet-related stories, and our coverage of each one waxed as it approached in time. The presentation "Comet Watch 2014" began with an explanation of what comets are, where they are located, and why we should study them. The second part detailed the cometrelated events happening in 2014. Comet ISON The biggest story at the beginning of 2014 was the breakup of Comet ISON. The dramatic time-lapse video of the comet's final solar approach was useful in explaining why it did not survive its close encounter with the sun.  Camelopardalids A new meteor shower from Comet 209P/LINEAR was predicted for the night of May 24th, 2014. While predictions of its intensity varied, higher estimates called for storms of meteors, with as many as 1,000 visible per hour. The actual number visible was about one per hour, but afterwards I was able to discuss what was learned about the parent comet from its no-show meteor shower: that the particles were unusually fragile. Rosetta Mission Most of the second half of 2014 ws dedicated to talking about the European Space Agency's Rosetta mission. Leading up to the August rendezvous, I talked about what the mission hoped to accomplish and what its status was. After its successful encounter, new images were available every day, which gave me a unique opportunity to update the presentation to reflect the latest developments from this distant mission, including its exciting lander touchdown. Comet Siding Spring The close pass of Mars by comet C/2013 A1 Siding Spring in October 2014 offered an opportunity to talk about protecting our robotic explorers from cosmic mishaps. I explained how each of the seven spacecraft (including rovers and orbiters) would take precautions to ensure their continued operation as well as gather data from the comet. Live Mission Coverage:  In addition to live presentations, there are also events hosted on our stage. In the past, Current Science and Technology had great success covering Space Shuttle launches, with hundreds of guests watching live. This year I revived live launch coverage with the Soyuz TMA-14M mission that carried three astronauts to the International Space Station. The program covered the retirement of the Space Shuttle, an overview of ISS operations, and concluded with live coverage of the successful liftoff of the Soyuz spacecraft.  In addition to crewed mission coverage, the Museum of Science also hosted a viewing party for the uncrewed test flight of the Orion crew capsule. The Exploration Flight Test 1 in December was a great success both in terms of a flawless mission and our event reaching hundreds of people with live mission coverage, hands-on activities, and updates on other human spaceflight stories.   Figure 1: Live Coverage of Orion Exploration Flight Test 1  Guest Scientists:  We often host guest researchers who give short lectures to museum guests on their field of expertise. Visitng scientists included Richard French (Cassini Radio Science Team Leader), who told the story of ten years of up-close science in the Saturn system, and Michael Hecht (Prinicpal Investigator, MOXIE), who gave an overview of the Mars 2020 rover. Looking ahead to 2015:  The next year brings some of the same exciting space content as well as some new stories to cover. The Dawn and New Horizons mission have important milestones in 2015 that I will be covering as they happen. In addition to the type of launches covered previously, I plan to branch out to covering additional live space events on stage, including cargo launches and spacewalks. Our department is very open to collaboration, and guest researchers are always most welcome.  2042.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
