 DIGITAL DATA REFINEMENT FOR THE AREA OF A CRATER ON THE MOON.  S. Ito1, H. Tan1, R, C. P2, S. Bhalla2, A. Vazhenin2, J. Terazono2, University of Aizu, Tsuruga, Ikki-Machi, Aizu-Wakamatsu, Fukushima 965-8580, Japan (m5171151@u-aizu.ac.jp, m5171203@u-aizu.ac.jp, d8132103@u-aizu.ac.jp, bhalla@u-aizu.ac.jp, vazhenin@u-aizu.ac.jp, terazono@u-aizu.ac.jp).    Background:  The early book that recorded state of the moon is "Nuncius Sidereus" written by Galileo Galilei and published in 1601. He found that there were geography shaped circular niche, and named such geography "κρατήρας" meant that glass or plate in Greek. Also, he found that any dark part shaped object was approximately-circular except for crater, and called this dark and light white part lunar mare and land [1]. Since this time, human have watched lunar mare and land by contrasting on the planetary surface through a telescope.  And now, developing image processing technology, we can extract the boundary of crater, mare, and land from algorithms which distinguish by contrasting seen at image [2]. The researchers think that monochrome contrasting looked by human eye is useful for distinguishing the boundary, and continue to research. However, this method has no estimation whether the boundary is correct or not, that is in a visual way. With that, we provide the new way that defines the domain of crater under data, which does not depend on human sense. Introduction:  In this paper, we provide possibility that we can recognize the boundary of crater by image processing technology avoiding human error which is caused by depending on human sense, by using lunar height data. It is different with existing way to extract the boundary of crater, that's new way. Therefore, this way which defines the boundary of crater depending on only data can become a norm for which a new boundary definition way we will think in the future. And, another boundary definition is made as suggestions under our boundary definition research.  Additionally, humans will make a landing on the moon. After that, places of residence are established around the craters. On this occasion, longitude and latitude are devised to be available as a means of identification for the location. The coordinate of the crater center also represented as latitude and longitude values. For example, the center coordinate of Tycho Crater can be expressed as /-43.3°S, -11.22°E/. Through, when we are staing on the moon, the center of Tycho Crater, it is difficult to understand where to go. Hence, numbering address is needed on the moon. Therefore, it is important to define accurate boundary.  The basis of boundary on earth is the natural boundary defined by natural object. Such as mountain chain, waterway, lake and ocean. Other kind of boundary are generally artificial or politically defined. For example, there are border between prefectures and countries. The numbering address is defined for identifying accurate location after defined the border between prefecture and country. As the toehold, the boundary definition is a way for depending on only data is that is important research to live on the moon. Available Data: At the stage of detecting the center point coordinate for the crater in program, the data which is published at Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature [3] is used. Planetary nomenclature is published for user to uniquely identify a feature on the surface planet or satellite so that the feature can be easily located, described, and discussed. This gazetteer contains detailed information about all names of topographic and albedo features on planets and satellites.  At the second stage of calculating the top of height on the surface planet, The valuable lunar data which is published on SELENE Data Archive [4]. This valuable lunar data collected by SELENE (KAGUYA) have been opened to the publish for scientific and educational utilization. The height data among these valuable lunar data is used for checking top of height for surface on the moon.  Algorithm for definition of the area on the moon crater: The algorithm to define the area of the moon crater is derive with discussion between researchers and lunar scientists. The area definition way is introduced in order (See Fig 1).  1 Find the central coordinate and diameter of the crater, which is denoted from Gazetter of Planetary Nomenclaure as mensioned above,  2 Find a radius from a diameter and draw a circle from the radius which makes a diameter half simply,  3 Detect a coordinate in the circumreference of the drawn circle, and the coordinate inside the concentric circle having a diameter about 1km,  4 Aquire the height data corresponding the detected coordinate from data repository, PostGIS, which is checked reference from SELENE (KAGUYA) Data Archive. 5 Set the highest coordinate in that at the circumference point of the moon crater 6 Repeat procedure 3 and 4, and make a 360-degree turn. Finally, the circumference of the moon crater in detail  7 Draw the redefined domain on a map by using OpenLayers [5] as a map interface, and PostGIS as Database The number 1 ~ 7 are procedure for algorithm for definition of the domain on the moon crater. Details explanation of  constraint are included in the figure. Virtual Model-View-Controller (VMVC) Architecture: We use a SOA distributed platform based on the Virtual-MVC design pattern [5], in which the processing logic is designed as reusable services, and the view is decoupled from the processing logic, therefore the GUI development task can be outsourced. The Virtual-MVC platform has a provision to handle applications that require intensive computation at the model end, but there is not a clear strategy to handle big size data as per in data-intensive applications. Our future objective of this study is to analyze the implementation strategies of related SOA and Web service (WS) based data-intensive applications that require special visual interface and transfer large data sets. As well to identify the technologies involved, and set a baseline to propose a suitable strategy for applications designed under Virtual-MVC. Current Status: Our system is developed under the algorithm and structure derived from our discussion between researchers and lunar scientists. The observation data is acquired from SELENE data archive, and the circumference circle coordinate of the moon crater is calculated. The phse of implementation for program is finished through few in number. However, it takes much time to show the result of the calculation for the circle coordinate in the circumference because SELENE data ar enormous. The processing speed for handling data will be improved if the operation environment and algorithm on the system are revised focussing on processing data. Conclusion: We were able to define the area of the crater using the data and elevation data which JAXA showed. The next step is calculation of area and the space volume of the crater from this stage. A great variety of methods are thought about to calculate an area and the volume. For example, it is a method to calculate an area from a triangular combination. However, we must make the program that can handle quantity of enormous data before thinking about area calculation.We defined the domain only for craters in this research. Even other topography (including Mare, Lacus, and Mons) wants to allow you to define the domain in future. We deal with data-intensive and complex visualization applications for Geographical Information Systems (GIS) such as lunar exploration and Tsunami simulation also, as well for complex mathematical visual algorithm execution.  What all have in common is that they handle dataintensive applications, and they require a specialized visual interface at the user end. The components of these applications are already developed but mostly as stand-alone. In the future, we aim to redesign these components to expose them as services facilitating the integration with other related applications, and therefore speed up the development process.  The next step is displaying the crater image derived from calculated coordinate on the Web by adaptation of OpenLayers. In order to evaluate accuracy of refinement for crater area on the moon, this image is compared with existent image of the moon crate on the height map. Digital data refinement for the area of all craters except for Tycho crater will also be realized in the future.    Figure 1. Algorithm for definition of the area on the moon crater   References: The related book, papers, and site gathered planetary data are following: [1] Author M. H. (1980) Crater no Kagaku [in Japanese], Chapter 1.1. [2] Author N. H., Author N. H., Author H. D., Author N. A. (2008) Planetary people, 69-76. [3] National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (1986) Gazetter of Planetary Nomenclature, http://planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov/ [4] Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. (2009) SELENE Data Archive, http://l2db.selene.darts.isas.jaxa.jp/index.html.en. [5] OpenLayers 3 Indiegogo campaign (2013) OpenLayers 3, http://openlayers.org. [6] Author R. C. Author A. V. (2013) In Proceedings of 8th International Workshop, DNIS 2013, LNCS.     