 A FIRST COMPARISON BETWEEN FIRST MAVEN RESULTS AND 3D HOT OXYGEN CORONA MODEL PREDICTIONS.  Y. Lee1, M. R. Combi1, V. Tenishev1, S. W. Bougher1, J. Deighan2, and N. Schneider2, 1University of Michigan (Space Research Building, 2455 Hayward street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; yunilee@umich.edu), 2Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (Dept. of Astrophysical & Planetary Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309).   Introduction: Observations of the Martian surface morphology suggest that the early Martian atmosphere was abundant in water and CO2. The current deficiency of water and CO2 raises questions as to the processes that led to the loss of atmosphere. Throughout the planet's history, the loss mechanisms and escape of volatiles in the atmosphere have changed markedly. The evaluation of the global atmospheric loss rate and the time-dependent volatile inventory is substantial and is needed to obtain a better understanding of the physical processes that drive the current state of the Martian atmosphere.  Among many possible mechanisms, nonthermal mechanisms such as dissociative recombination of molecular ions produce hot atoms (suprethermal particles) deep in the thermosphere. These hot atoms exchange momentum and energy with the background atmosphere via numerous collisions and result in the formation of the extended hot corona in the upper thermosphere and exosphere, from which the most of the escape of heavy neutrals occur.  Before the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) mission, 3D investigations of the Martian hot oxygen corona have been enabled by modeling with a coupled framework between a 3D particle simulator and 3D thermosphere and ionosphere model. A comparison with the returned in situ observations from MAVEN will provide additional constraints to the evolution of the volatile inventory in both current and evolutionary aspects. This work presents a first comparison between first observations of the exospheric oxygen made with the Imaging Ultraviolet Spectrograph (IUVS) instrument on board MAVEN and model predictions by a 3D global approach. Modeling:  A 3D simulation of the Martian hot oxygen corona is performed by using our Adaptive Mesh Particle Simulator code adapted to Mars (MarsAMPS) [1]. AMPS utilizes Monte Carlo methodology in test-particle mode to describe the formation of the Martian hot corona and the escape of neutral particles. The description of the thermosphere and ionosphere is incorporated into AMPS by coupling with Mars Global Ionosphere Thermosphere Model (M-GITM) [2]. This coupled framework between AMPS and M-GITM provide a self-consistent description of the upper thermosphere, ionosphere and exosphere.  In the model, the most important source reaction for hot oxygen is expected to be dissociative recombination of O2+. The model adopts the latest available key model parameters, which are used widely by other modelers. The list of key model parameters particularly for interactions with the background atmosphere is given in table 1. Simulations are performed with the solar and atmospheric conditions matching those when the observations were made.  Key model parameters . Number of background species = 4 (O, CO2, N2, and CO) . Integrated cross sections (cm-2) Ohot-O = 6.4×10-15 Ohot-CO2 = 1.2×10-14 Ohot-N2 = 1.8×10-14 Ohot-CO = 1.8×10-14 . Angular differential forward scattering scheme by Kharchenko et al. (2000) [3] Table 1. List of key model parameters.  To compare our simulated hot oxygen with observations that are measured in brightness, we directly calculate the brightness of the exospheric oxygen from our model. The location and direction of the spacecraft in the model are identified by using SPICE, and the simulated density is integrated along the lines of sight of the instrument.  Discussion:  This work performs a simulation to predict the exospheric oxygen in the upper thermosphere and exosphere of Mars, which is compared with the up-to-date observations made by the IUVS instrument on board MAVEN. We anticipate that this first comparison between observations and 3D model predictions will help constrain the current models for the escape mechanisms of hot particles and the evolution of the atmosphere.  References: [1] Tenishev, V. et al. (2013) Icarus, 226, 1538-1549. [2] Bougher, S. W. et al. (2014) JGR, accepted. [3] Kharchenko, V. et al. (2000) JGR, 105, A11. 