2063.PDF
OXYGEN PICKUP IONS AT MARS: MODEL COMPARISONS WITH MAVEN DATA AND IMPLICATIONS FOR OXYGEN ESCAPE. A. Rahmati1, T. E. Cravens1, D. E. Larson2, R. J. Lillis2, J. E. Connerney3, J. S. Halekas4, and the MAVEN team. 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, 2Space Science Laboratory, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, 4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA   Introduction: Geological evidence of substantial erosion on the Martian surface, very likely due to the presence of water up until 3.7 billion years ago [1] suggests that Mars had an atmosphere capable of supporting liquid water on the surface, but over time most of the atmosphere has been lost to space. One of the main goals of the MAVEN (Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN) mission to Mars is to characterize the current state of the upper atmosphere and escape rates by measuring the drivers of atmospheric escape as well as the densities and temperatures of the upperatmospheric species over the span of one Earth year [2]. One of the major sources of atmospheric escape on Mars is the dissociative recombination of O2+ in the ionosphere, which can create oxygen atoms with energies above the escape energy. These atoms create the hot oxygen exosphere of Mars, which extends to tens of Martian radii [3]. Direct measurement of the outer parts of the oxygen exosphere, which is mainly populated with escaping neutral oxygen atoms, is hard due to the very low densities at high altitudes. However, ionization of these atoms creates pickup ions that are accelerated by the solar wind convective electric field to high energies, allowing them to be measured by the SEP (Solar Energetic Particle) instrument on MAVEN [4]. Solar wind velocities above ~500 km/s with large angles between the solar wind bulk flow and the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) are needed for pickup ions to reach energies greater than SEP’s oxygen detection threshold (~60 keV). Method:  In this work, we model the hot oxygen exosphere of Mars and calculate the resulting pickup ion fluxes near Mars. A two-stream method is used to find the distribution of photo-chemically produced hot oxygen atoms at 300 km. The Liouville theorem is used to find the densities at higher altitudes, by employing the conservations of energy and angular momentum for neutral oxygen atoms and assuming a collision-less exosphere above 300 km. A test particle code follows the trajectories of oxygen ions created in the Martian exosphere and picked up by the solar wind magnetic and electric fields. Since the gyro-radius of pickup oxygen in the undisturbed solar wind at Mars is larger than the radius of Mars, it is necessary to use an exosphere model that extends out to tens of Martian radii. We use the magnetic field data measured by MAVEN MAG (magnetometer), the solar wind velocities measured by SWIA (Solar Wind Ion Analyzer) and utilize SEP’s field of view, look direction, geometric factor and response matrix for oxygen detection to model count rates for each energy channel of SEP. We compare our model results with the SEP data taken since MAVEN’s orbit insertion (Sep 21, 2014), and throughout the first six months of the mission, in order to constrain our hot oxygen exosphere model. This method can be applied to any hot oxygen model and can serve as a test for different models of the Martian oxygen exosphere and photo-chemical escape rates. Results:  For our simulations, the ionospheric densities and temperatures are taken from the MTGCM (Mars Thermospheric General Circulation Model) [5]. The energy distribution of newly born hot oxygen atoms are taken from [6]. We will constrain the thermospheric and ionospheric models using MAVEN data in the upcoming months. The distribution function of hot oxygen atoms at 300 km is calculated by a twostream method and the Liouville theorem extends this distribution for the gravitationally bound and escaping parts to higher altitudes (Figure 1). Figure 2 shows the typical gyro-motion of a pickup oxygen ion in the undisturbed solar wind upstream of Mars. Figure 3 is the calculated O+ flux near Mars, separated for the gravitationally bound and the escaping parts of the exosphere.  Since MAVEN’s arrival at Mars, SEP has been detecting pickup oxygen in its lower energy channels. Pickup oxygen atoms detected by SEP begin their trajectory ~15-20 Martian radii upstream of Mars, and the main part of the oxygen exosphere at those altitudes is not gravitationally bound, and therefore escaping. We carry out a statistical analysis of the data SEP has measured for the times MAVEN is in the undisturbed solar wind, to find the dependence of measured pickup ion fluxes on the solar wind velocity, the IMF direction, and the SEP look angles. Figure 4 shows one of the model results for the count rates that SEP measures for three different solar wind speeds. In this simulation, the ionization frequency of oxygen atoms is assumed to be 4.5 × 10-7 s-1 and the IMF is 5 nT, perpendicular to the solar wind bulk flow direction. SEP’s open field of view is toward the Sun, with an opening angle of ± 20 degrees. SEP’s attenuator is assumed to be open, giving a detector effective area of ~1 cm2. 2063.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
*This is a place-holder abstract. Up-to-date results and the implications of the model comparison with SEP data for the escape of neutral oxygen from Mars will be discussed at the conference.   Figure 1. The density profiles of hot O in the exosphere of Mars, separated for gravitationally bound and escaping neutral oxygen atoms. The O density estimated from Phobos-2 ion data [7] is shown by the circle.   Figure 2. The trajectory of an O+ ion calculated analytically for uniform solar wind velocity of Usw = 500 km/s, magnetic field of B = 5 nT normal to Usw, and motional electric field of E = - Usw × B = 2.5 V/km.    Figure 3. The energy spectrum of O+ ions at an altitude of 6,200 km upstream of Mars (MAVEN’s apoapsis).   Figure 4. Model count rates for SEP measurements of pickup O+ from the extended exosphere of Mars for three different solar wind speeds, perpendicular to the IMF direction. Realistic SEP response matrix and energy bins with a sun-pointing detector are assumed.   References:  [1] Mangold et al. (2012) JGR 117, E04003 [2] Bougher S. W. et al. (2014) Space Sci Rev., doi:10.1007/s11214-014-0053-7 [3] Chassefière E. and Leblanc F. (2004) Planet. Space Sci., 52(11), 10391058. [4] Rahmati A. et al. (2014) GRL 41(14), 48124818 [5] Bougher S. W. et al., (2009) SAE 2009-012386. [6] Fox J. L. and Hać A. (1997) JGR 102(A11), 24005–24011 [7] Cravens T. E. et al. (2002) JGR, 107, A8. 2063.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
