2072.PDF
CAN WE DISTINGUISH BETWEEN SHOCK-DARKENED AND SPACE-WEATHERED ASTEROIDS?T. Kohout1, 2, A. Penttilä1, M. Gritsevich3, 4, 5, D. Britt6, V. Reddy7, P. Mann8, J. Čuda9, J. Filip9, O. Malina9, V. I.Grokhovsky5, G. A. Yakovlev5, J. Haloda10, 11, P. Halodova10, K. Muinonen1,3, R. Zbořil9, 1 Department of Physics,University of Helsinki, Finland (tomas.kohout@helsinki.fi), 2 Institute of Geology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic, 3 Finnish Geospatial Research Institute, Masala, Finland, 4 Russian Academy of Sciences, Dorodnicyn Computing Centre, Department of Computational Physics, Moscow, Russia, 5 Ural FederalUniversity, Ekaterinburg, Russia, 6 Department of Physics, University of Central Florida, USA, 7 Planetary ScienceInstitute, Tucson, USA, 8 Department of Geography, University of Winnipeg, Canada,  9 Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Departments of Physical Chemistry and Experimental Physics, Palacky University Olomouc, Czech Republic, 10 Czech Geological Survey, Prague, Czech Republic, 11 Oxford InstrumentsNanoAnalysis, High Wycombe, Bucks, United Kingdom.Introduction:  Both lunar-type space weatheringand impact shock darkening are capable of significantdarkening of asteroid spectra. Thus, a question arises– are we able to distinguish between these processesfrom asteroid reflectance spectra?The Chelyabinsk meteorite represents unique opportunity with delivery of large amount of meteoritematerial of various shock levels. The basic three lithologies include (1) slightly shocked light-coloredlithology, (2) partly molten shock-darkened darkcolored lithology, and (3) entirely molten impact meltlithology [1]. In order to compare shock effects tospace weathering, the light-colored lithology was subjected to simulated space weathering (method basedon [2]) and the spectral changes were compared tomixtures of the light-colored with impact melt [3] orshock-darkened materials. For comparison, spaceweathering experiments with olivine [2] and orthopyroxene were done.Results on olivine and orthopyroxene:  Resultson both minerals show the 1 µm (in both olivine andorthopyroxene) and 2 µm (in orthopyroxene only)absorption bands progressively reduced. The spectralslope increases in both minerals with the amount ofspace weathering. In orthopyroxene, both the 1 and 2µm bands are progressively reduced by a nearly constant ratio. The slope change, however, is more progressive over the 2 µm band. Orthopyroxene is alsomore resistant to space weathering which is consistentwith previous results, e. g. [4] and [5].Results from the Chelyabinsk meteorite:  Results from experiments with the Chelyabinsk meteoriteindicate that shocked material shows no significantspectral slope change while both the 1 and 2 µm bandsare progressively reduced with a nearly constant depthratio.  This  means  that  shock  has  the  same  effect  onboth the olivine and orthopyroxene present in theChelyabinsk meteorite.In contrast, the space weathering causes a strongincrease in the spectral slope. Also, the ratio of the 2µm band depth to the 1 µm band depth is progressively increasing (Fig. 1) with amount of space weathering, most likely due to the higher resistance of pyroxene to space weathering compared to olivine in anolivine-pyroxene mixture. (Note that in pure pyroxenes the reduction in band depth of both bands is constant with increasing space weathering.)The 2 µm band is  caused by the presence of moreresistant orthopyroxene only, while the 1 µm band iscontributed by both orthopyroxene and olivine. Asolivine is more sensitive to space weathering, thecombined 1 µm band decreases more progressively.This is also seen in the principal component analysis  (PCA)  space  using  the  method  of  [6]  shown  inFigure 2. The fresh light-colored lithology plots intothe Q-type field. Both space-weathered and shockedmaterials show reduction in the PC1’ component related to the decrease in the 1 µm band depth. However, the addition of shocked material causes significantreduction in the PC2’ component related to the decrease in the 2 µm band depth and transition from theQ-type field across the alpha line into the C/X complex. In contrast, space-weathered material showssmaller PC2’ component changes and moves along thealpha line towards the S-type field.Conclusions: The 1 and 2 µm band depth ratio orthe PC2’/PC1’ ratio together with the spectral slopemay be an indicator of shock darkening vs. spaceweathering in (ordinary chondrite) asteroid spectra.Based on these parameters, it seems that space weathering is not capable of fully obstructing the silicateabsorption bands. Shock, however, appears to be fullycapable of obstructing the weaker 2 µm pyroxene absorptions which is indicated by the transition into C/Xcomplex in PCA.References:[1] Kohout T. et al. (2014) Icarus, 228, 78-85. [2]Kohout T. et al. (2014) Icarus, 237, 75-83. [3] ReddyV. et al. (2014) Icarus, 237, 116-130. [4] Sasaki S. etal. (2002). Adv. Space Res., 29, 783-788. [5] MarchiS. et al. (2005) A&A, 443, 769–775. [6] DeMeo F. E.et al. (2009) Icarus, 202, 160–180.2072.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Fig. 1. The ratio of the 2 µm band depth to the 1 µm band depth for the shocked and space weathered Chelyabinskmeteorite.Fig. 2. Shock (black points) and space weathering (color points) trends as seen in the principal component analysis(PCA) space.ShockSpaceweathering2072.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
