2091.PDF
DISCRETE DIPOLE APPROXIMATION OF SCATTERING FROM GRANULAR TARGETS.  N. T. Stein1, R. E. Arvidson1, and M. Wolff2 1Washington University in St. Louis, Dept. of Earth and Planetary Science, St. Louis, MO (n.stein@wustl.edu); 2Space Science Institute, Boulder, CO.   Introduction:  Remote observation of granular media is an important tool for determining the surface composition of bodies in our solar system. The surfaces of these bodies typically consist of regolith and/or soil particles often comparable to or smaller than the incident light wavelength of interest and can have little to no porosity. Most current approaches for modeling regolith layers use approximate models to derive reflection and transmission of semi-infinite layers composed of many grains. When regolith grains are not large compared to incident light wavelength, however, approximations based on geometric optics such as the Hapke/Shkuratov [1,2] models cannot accurately model scattering. Similar insufficiency is seen when grains are not well-separated, making the scattering properties of well-packed granular targets and bedrock difficult to model [3]. The failure of current modeling approaches in these limits calls for a theory that reproduces spectral properties of known samples over a full range of particle size, porosity, and refractive indices. Discrete dipole approximation (DDA) avoids commonly inappropriate assumptions about particle size, porosity, and refractive index by approximating a continuum target with a finite array of polarizable points with scattering and absorption properties that can be solved using Maxwell’s equations [3]. Improvements in computing power since its introduction have made DDA an increasingly viable technique. More recently, DDA has been adapted for cases with periodic horizontal boundary conditions to model regolith radiative transfer for monomers of arbitrary size and packing density [4]. Despite these efforts, DDA modeling has been limited to the calculation of near-field scattering effects and has not yet been used to approximate the radiance of known samples. Eventually, DDA may be used to model the radiance of granular targets over a range of particle size, porosity, and refractive indices. This abstract discusses efforts to constrain the effects of porosity on DDA scattering approximations of a semi-infinite collection of spheres as a first step in developing a first-principles model for the scattering of light from planetary surfaces.  Effect of Variations in Porosity on near-field scattering:  The Hapke/Shkuratov and other radiative transfer models are insufficient in the limit of small grain separation, typically on the order of incident light wavelength. DDA is more flexible regarding target geometry, limited only by the constraint that interdipole separation d is small relative to wavelength λ such that mkd < 0.5 for refractive index m and wave number k. Within this constraint, targets consisting of a lattice of spheres extending periodically in the y-z plane were generated using DDSCAT 7.3. To model an extreme case of small target size, each sphere was assumed to have a radius of 0.050 μm with uniform lattice spacing of 0 to 0.2 μm. The clusters were represented by N > 20000 dipoles, yielding at least 100 dipoles per sphere. The spheres were assumed to consist of astrosilicate, whose dielectric and refractive properties have been characterized by Draine [4]. Scattering coefficients, here defined as the scattering cross section per effective target area, (S11+S12)/ak2 for Mueller matrix S and target area a, were averaged over nine target orientations and two incident polarizations. Additional orientational averaging had little effect on the calculated scattering coefficients due to target symmetry. Scattering coefficients were calculated over a range of 1 to 3.5 μm. For the largest refractive index, mkd = 0.23, meaning the calculated differential scattering cross section should be accurate to within a few percent.  Three packing cases were modeled across the full range of wavelengths: close packing, in which the spheres are in contact, separation of a single radius (0.5 μm), and separation of several radii (2 μm). Representative subsets of the targets for these cases are shown in Figs. 1-3. The orientationally averaged scattering coefficients calculated for these three cases show higher scattering for closely-packed targets, decreasing exponentially with increasing incident light wavelength (Fig. 4). Changes in the scattering coefficient as a function of average sphere separation are shown in Fig. 5 for λ = 2.5 μm. These results demonstrate the DDA accurately predicts changes in scattering due to porosity in the limit of sphere separation on the order of or less than incident light wavelength.  Future Work:  It is ultimately desirable to use DDA to model the radiance of realistic granular targets. Scattering calculations will be extended from homogeneous lattices to larger, more complicated target geometries consisting of conglomerations of spheres. The scattering properties of irregular grains, such as birefringent calcite flakes, have been calculated for several materials using DDA [4,5]. Similar tar2091.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
gets representing periodic lattices of thin calcite flakes will be modeled across a wide range of orientations to constrain the effects porosity on scattering for more realistic targets and eventually to model the radiance of planetary surface materials.     Fig. 1: Cubic subset of close-packed spheres target (no separation between spheres in target).   Fig. 2: Cubic subset of single-radius (0.5 μm) sphere spacing target.   Fig. 3: Cubic subset of large (2 μm) sphere spacing target.  Fig. 4: DDA approximation of scattering coefficient as a function of wavelength for periodic collections of spheres with packing shown in Figs. 1-3.   Fig. 5: Scattering Coefficient as a function of sphere separation for λ = 2.5 μm (m = 1.6778 + 0.0357i).  References: [1] Hapke, B. (2008). Icarus. 195, 819-926. [2] Purcell, E. M. and C. Pennypacker (1973). Astrophys. J. 186, 705-714. [3] Draine, B. T. and Flatau, P. J. (2008). J. Opt. Soc. Am. 25, 26932703. [4] Draine 2003, Astrophys J 598, 1026. [5] Nousiainen, T. et al. (2009). J. Geophys. Res. 114, 1984-2012. [6] Dabrowska, D. D. et al. (2013). J. Quant. Spec. & Rad. Trans. 124, 62-78.   2091.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
