 COMPOSITIONAL DIVERSITY ACROSS THE HUMBOLDTIANUM BASIN.  D. P. Moriarty III1 and C. M. Pieters1, 1Dept. of Earth, Environmental, and Planetary Sciences, Brown Univ., Providence, RI [Daniel_Moriarty@Brown.edu]  Introduction:  In this study, the compositional diversity of the Humboldtianum Basin is analyzed using M3 data [1].  Humboldtianum is a Nectarian-age multiring basin [2] that features a large expanse of smooth, dark mare basalt interior to its inner ring, referred to as Mare Humboldtianum.  Mare basalt exposures are also present between the inner and outer basin rings.  In the discussion below, these will be referred to as the "central mare" and "outer mare," respectively.  Previous studies have suggested that both the central mare and outer mare exhibit a range in composition and age [35].   Here, we identify four distinct compositional units across Humboldtianum.   Methods:  For Humboldtianum, both global mode (85 spectral channels, 140x240 m pixels) and target mode (260 spectral channels, 70x140 m pixels) M3 data are available.  A compositional overview of the region is provided using the PLC technique [6] for analysis of pyroxene absorption bands.  PLC uses parabola fits to the 1 µm and 2 µm mafic absorption bands after a two-part linear continuum removal.  Maps of compositionally-sensitive parameters (including absorption band centers, depths, and spectral continuum slopes) were created to highlight compositional diversity in spatial context and identify areas of interest for more detailed spectral analysis.   Results:  M3 target images for a subregion of Humboldtianum are given in Fig. 1b-c.  Since mafic component is dominated by pyroxenes, the 1 µm band depth map given in Fig. 1c provides an overview of pyroxene abundance across the region.  In general, central and outer mare soils exhibit relatively strong 1 µm absorption.  The massif material of the inner ring is heterogeneous.  The northern portion of the ring exhibits very weak or nonexistent 1 µm absorptions, while several small areas on the southern portion exhibit strong 1 µm absorptions.  The remainder of the nonmare basin materials exhibit weak to non-existent 1 µm absorptions, indicating a highly feldspathic composition.   For a more detailed analysis of mafic compositions throughout the region, spectra were extracted from several areas exhibiting high 1 µm band strengths (>0.15).  These areas are indicated by the colored arrows in Fig. 1b-c.  Such pyroxene-rich exposures were observed in the central mare (red arrows), the outer mare (blue arrows), and the southern inner ring massifs (green arrows).  These high band strength areas typically represent ~10-100 contiguous pixels associated with small, fresh craters. For comparison, 3x3 pixel Fig. 1:  (A) LROC [10] color shaded relief for the Humboldtianum region.  The inner and outer basin rings are indicated with the dashed lines.  The red box indicates the coverage of the M3 target image analyzed.  (B) M3 2980 nm radiance (with topography preserved) for this region of Humboldtianum.  (C) PLC-derived 1 µm band depth map (correlated with pyroxene abundance and optical maturity) for this region.    average spectra from a selection of small, fresh craters from within the low-mafic areas were also analyzed. These areas are shown with white arrows (Fig. 1b-c).   Spectra for several example areas are given in Fig. 2a.  Compositional differences between the surface units  are readily apparent.  The materials with low pyroxene abundance (white arrows, black spectra) are relatively bright.  The central mare materials are relatively dark.  The outer mare and inner ring massif exposures exhibit intermediate albedos, with the ring massif materials being somewhat brighter.  The pyroxene-bearing exposures on the inner ring massifs exhibit absorption bands with a shorter wavelength than the mare materials.  Since absorption band centers are systematically related to pyroxene composition [6-8], this reflects differences in pyroxene composition between mare and ring materials.   The variations in absorption band center are quantified through the PLC analysis.  The PLC-derived band centers neatly separate the inner ring massif exposures (shorter-wavelength band centers) from the mare exposures (longer-wavelength band centers).  From these band center results, it is clear that the average inner basin ring pyroxenes are more Mg-rich than the mare pyroxenes.  This is consistent with the geologic context, as the inner ring materials likely originated in the noritic lower crust, while mantle-derived basalts typically contain significant high-Ca pyroxene.   The central and outer mare basalts exhibit a similar range in band centers, suggesting that they are similar in average pyroxene composition.  However, the central mare exhibits a lower albedo than the outer mare.  This could indicate a higher plagioclase content or lower opaque content in the outer mare.  The central mare also exhibit a wider range in 1 µm band center than the inter-ring basalts.  This can arise from differing strengths of the 1.2 µm pyroxene band [6], implying a wider range in cooling histories for the central basalts [9] or small variations in mineral abundance (olivine, plagioclase). Conclusions: (1) Four distinct materials were identified across this subregion of Humboldtianum: central basalts, outer basalts, low-Ca pyroxene-bearing materials on the south inner ring massifs, and feldspathic materials on the north inner ring massifs and non-mare basin deposits.    (2) Mafic composition and abundance varies greatly across the region.  The non-mare basin surface exhibits a feldspathic composition.  Mare basalts exhibit the most pyroxene-rich soils. The inner ring massifs exhibit significant heterogeneity in pyroxene abundance.  (3) The central mare exhibits the lowest albedo in the region.  The outer mare exhibit intermediate albedo, while both are similar in pyroxene composition.  (4) Central basalts exhibit more variation in the 1 µm band than the inter-ring mare deposits, which could reflect a more variable cooling history (producing variable 1.2 µm band strengths and therefore affecting the PLC-measured 1 µm band center).  (5) Pyroxene-rich exposures on the south inner ring massifs are lower in Fe,Ca than mare pyroxenes and are likely derived from crustal sources. Acknowledgements: This analysis is supported through NASA LASER (NNX12AI96G) and SSERVI (NNA14AB01A). References:  [1]Pieters, C. M. et al. (2009), Current Sci. 96:4:500-505.  [2]Wilhelms, D. E. (1987), Geol. Hist. of the Moon, USGS.  [3]Belton, J. S. et al. (1994), Science, 264:5162:1112-1115, [4]Hiesinger, H. et al. (1996), LPSC XXVII, #547.  [5]Hiesinger, H. et al (2000), J. Geophys. Res:  Planets, 105:E12:29239029275.  [6]Moriarty, D. P. and C. M. Pieters, Met. and Planet. Sci. submitted [7]Klima, R. L. et al. (2007), Met. and Planet. Sci, 42:2:228-251.  [8]Klima, R. L. et al. (2011), Met. and Planet. Sci., 46:3:379-395.  [9]Klima, R. L. et al. (2008) Met. and Planet. Sci., 43:10:1591-1604.  [10]Robinson, M. S. et al. (2010), Space Sci. Rev., 150:1-4:81-124.    Fig. 2:  (A) Example spectra from locations indicated by the large arrows in Fig. 2b-c.  (B) PLC-measured band centers for the pyroxene-bearing exposures indicated by the colored arrows in Fig. 2b-c, superimposed over the trend for synthetic pyroxenes with a wide range in Fe, Mg, and Ca content [6-8].  Generally, low-Ca pyroxenes exhibit shorter-wavelength band centers than high-Ca pyroxenes.  