2104.PDF
INTERACTIVE MAPPING OF MARS (iMARS) - A NEW ONLINE E/PO ACTIVITY.  G. R. Osinski1,2, M. Battler1, T. N. Harrison1, E. Pilles1, H. Sapers1, M. Steinberg1, and L. L. Tornabene1, 1Centre for Planetary Science & Exploration / Dept. Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 2Dept. of Physics & Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada (gosinski@uwo.ca).   Introduction:  The Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX; http://cpsx.uwo.ca) at The University of Western Ontario officially opened in the Fall of 2008 and draws membership from ten departments across Western. A major component of the vision of the CPSX is to strengthen and grow the Canadian and international space community through inspiring and training the next generation of scientists and engineers. With funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada's PromoScience program and support from the Department of Earth Sciences at Western, the CPSX has developed a new web-based initiative called Interactive Mapping of Mars (iMARS) (Fig. 1).   Figure 1. Landing page for the iMARS website.  The general objective of the online activity is for participants to plan and design a rover mission to Mars - utilizing the Google Earth plug-in - and based on a given mission goal (e.g., to find evidence for past volcanism). The interactive online activity involves users passing a series of increasingly complex mission scenarios and collecting badges along the way for successful completion of individual missions. Ultimately, users are able to select and plan their own mission. Training in image analysis and the recognition of landforms is provided through a series of tutorials that feature images and descriptions of various classes of landforms (e.g., volcanoes, impact craters, etc.) and quizzes to test the user's learning. In addition to this online activity, inquiry-based classroom workshops, weeklong summer camps, have also been developed. iMARS:  The centrepiece of the iMARS program is an interactive online activity in which users conduct and eventually plan missions to the Mars. To do so requires an understanding of the various landforms or features that shape the surface of Mars. iMARS integrates learning about the surface of Mars with the mission planning so that knowledge is gained in a fun and immersive way. This website is currently in the beta testing phase and the public launch and release is scheduled for Winter 2015. The current landing page of the iMARS website is shown in Figure 1. Mission Control.  The first port of call for users is the Mission Control page (Fig. 2), which is accessible directly from the main landing page under "Plan a Mission". Users are greeted with the following message:  "You've just been hired as a planetary scientist, and we at the Interactive Mapping of Mars (IMARS) program require your help! We will require your expert advice to help us identify surface features on Mars, and to help guide our rovers on their missions. You will discover deep trenches, towering volcanoes, massive craters, and ancient river channels during your groundbreaking exploration of the Martian surface."    Figure 2. Mission Control page, where users are greeted as planetary scientists and sign up.   2104.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Plan a Mission.  Upon creating a simple login, users plan a series of series of increasingly complex mission scenarios, beginning with "Search for Ancient Riverbeds". Users collect badges along the way for successful completion of individual missions (Fig. 3). Ultimately, users are able to select and plan their own mission. Some key aspects are iMARS are: . Users will learn the educational material as they go along, and earn rewards along the way. . Each mission will be designed to be only a few minutes long, to keep them interested and the missions as a whole will be designed to teach all of the surface features. . They will get reward badges displayed in their user profile for accomplishments. . After successfully accomplishing a number of missions, participants can design their own, with options including rover platform, etc.    Figure 3. After completing the first mission, users are presented with inclreasingly more complex scenario's, such as this one where the goal is to find "Ancient Outflow Channels and Streamlined Islands".  Training.  Training in image analysis and the recognition of landforms is provided through the Tutorial and Feature Example Pages. This can be done at any point in the process so that users can choose where to start depending on their background knowledge and skill level. There, information on the type of imagery used, descriptions of various classes of landforms (e.g., volcanoes, impact craters, etc.) (Fig. 4), galleries of landforms, and quizzes to test the user's learning, are provided.    Figure 4. Example of one of the Tutorial pages describing impact craters, what they are, and how to distinguish them from similar landforms (e.g., volcanoes).  Following and Rating Missions.  Once a mission is "launched," a mission control blog provides updates on the status of a mission and a "choose your rover" option provides the opportunity to unlock more advanced rovers by collaborating with other scientists and rating their missions. Indeed, evaluation of missions will be done using a crowd-sourcing method. This involves users of iMars being presented with landforms identified by other users in their missions to see if they agree with the identifications given by the rover mission planners (e.g., water feature, aeolian feature, volcanic feature). Votes in agreement on identification of features increases the rating of a user's mission, while the process of identifying features from other users' missions result in collaboration points. In addition to being fully accessible online, CPSX will also target primary- and secondary-school grades in which astronomy and space science is taught. Teachers in K-12 classrooms will be able to sign-up for the activity ahead of time in order to receive a workshop package, which will guide them on how to use the iMARS online activity with their class. Teachers will be able to set up groups for their classroom so that they can evaluate their students based on predetermined criteria.  Acknowledgements:  The iMARS activities are developed in partnerships with the Department of Earth Sciences at Western University, Sports Western, the Thames Valley District School Board, and Dimentians Web Marketing and Design. We are continually looking for new collaborators to help design or test our inquiry- and web-based activities. Please contact cpsxoutreach@uwo.ca if you are interested.  2104.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
