 FIRST RESULTS OF THE MARTIAN PLASMA ENVIRONMENT BELOW 500 KM FROM THE LANGMUIR PROBE AND WAVES INSTRUMENT ON THE MAVEN MISSION.  C. M. Fowler1, R. E. Ergun1, L. Andersson1, M. W. Mooroka1, G. T. Delory2, T. McEnulty1, T. Weber1, A. I. Eriksson3, D. Andrews3, D. L. Mitchell2, J. P. McFadden2, J. S. Halekas4 , D. Larson2, J. E. P. Connerney5, J. Espley5,  and F. Eparvier1, 1Laboratory	   for	   Atmospheric	   and	   Space	   Physics,	   University	   of	   Colorado,	   Boulder,	   CO,	   80303  (christopher.fowler@lasp.colorado.edu), 2Space	   Sciences	   Laboratory,	   University	   of	   California,	   Berkeley	   CA	   94720, 3Swedish Institute for Spacephysics, Uppsala, Sweden,	   4Department	   of	   Physics	   and	   Astronomy,	   University	   of	  Iowa,	  Iowa	  City,	  IA	  52242,	  5NASA	  Goddard	  Space	  Flight	  Center,	  Greenbelt,	  MD	  20771.	   Introduction: Electron temperature and density are critical quantities in understanding an upper atmosphere. Approximately 40 years ago, the Viking landers reached the Martian surface, measuring the first (and only) two temperature profiles during descent [1]. All spacecraft that have visited the red planet thereafter have had limited plasma packages and 'high' altitude orbits, preventing those missions from gaining detailed information about Mars' upper atmosphere. Remotely, the upper atmosphere of Mars has been studied for example, by the MARSIS sounder on Mars Express (MEX) [2], but complete plasma measurements are lacking. The MAVEN mission was designed to characterize the upper atmosphere and included the Langmuir Probe and Waves (LPW) instrument[3] to provide fundamental measurements of the basic atmospheric dynamics at Mars. MAVEN reached Mars in the fall of 2014 and the first months of data from the LPW instrument have provided exciting information from an interesting planet. Topic of This Presentation:  The Martian ionosphere is generally observed below ~ 500km [4]. There has been discussion as to the existence of an ionopause at Mars [5]. At lower altitudes the plasma environment is dominated by cold high-density plasma. At higher altitudes, hotter plasma populations contribute significantly to currents measured by the Langmuir Probe and to spacecraft charging processes. This paper investigates the first few months of data from the MAVEN mission to evaluate where and when this hot component becomes significant and if an ionopause can be identified. The study identifies the altitude at which the assumption of only one cold electron population holds. It is based on measurements of densities and temperatures from the LPW instrument with supporting measurements from the other PF instruments. Background: The MAVEN mission is the first satellite sent to Mars with a complete plasma package. The Particle and Fields (PF) suite consists of 7 instruments: the Langmuir Probe and Waves (LPW), an Extreme Ultra Violet sensor (EUV), a magnetometer (MAG), two ion instruments (SWIA and STATIC), an electron instrument (SWEA), and an energetic particle instrument (SEP). Together, these instruments allow the upper atmosphere of Mars to be well characterized. The LPW instrument has two sensors located on ~7 m booms that can be operated both as two separate Langmuir probes or as an electric field instrument. LPW shares a common electronics box with EUV, but on the MAVEN mission EUV is operated as a separate science instrument.  The LPW instrument makes fundamentally different measurements in Langmuir Probe mode versus Electric Field (Waves) mode. When the sensors are operated in Langmuir Probe mode, the potential is swept over a set voltage steps, and the current to the sensor at each voltage step is measured. This allows the density and temperature of the cold plasma to be measured. Data from the Langmuir probes is complex to analyze as changes such as spacecraft photoelectrons and instrument aging need to be removed from the measurement curved. Therefore, the LPW instrument was designed to also measure the plasma line (using the Electric Field mode) and hence obtain accurate information about the local electron density. The plasma line can be observed naturally but the LPW instrument also can stimulate this measurement with a weak white noise broadcast. The LPW instrument also observes low frequency waves to identify where wave-particle energy conversions occurs. Hence, the LPW instrument provides information about how energy is flowing in the Martian system together with the other PF instruments. Finally, the LPW instrument can detect nano-size dust particles impacting the spacecraft, providing information about Phobos-Diemos-Mars-Sun interactions. Summary: This presentation has focused on one of  the multiple research areas that the LPW instrument is contributing to in understanding the dynamics of the Martian upper atmosphere. As the MAVEN orbit precesses over different latitudes and local times, the LPW observations will provide critical information to  drive models that can demonstrate how the upper atmosphere varies and what processes are critical for atmospheric escape at Mars. References:	  [1]	  Hanson,	  Sanatani,	  and	  Zuccaro,	  (1977)	  JGR,	  82,	  4351-­-4363.	  [2]	  Gurnett	  et	  al.	  (2005)	  Science,	  310,	  1929-­-1933	  [3]	  Andersson	  et	  al.,	  LPW	  instrument	  paper	  submitted	  to	  Space	  Science	  Re-­view.	  [4]	  Dubinin	  et	  al.	  (2012)	  Earth,	  Planet	  and	   Space,	  64,	  11-­-120.	  [5]	  Mitchell	  et	  al	  (2001)	  JGR,	  106,	  23419-­-23427.	  	    