2127.PDF
LATE NOACHIAN ICY HIGHLANDS CLIMATE REGIME: A HYDROLOGICAL SYSTEM CONCEPTUAL MODEL BASED ON THE McMURDO DRY VALLEYS.  James W. Head1 and David R. Marchant2, 1Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912 USA, 2Earth and Environment, Boston University, Boston MA 02215 USA (james_head@brown.edu).  Introduction: In contrast to a "warm and wet" early Mars climate scenario [1,2], recent Late Noachian GCMs produce mean annual temperatures (MAT) well below 0°C. Above a few tens of millibars, atmosphericsurface coupling yields adiabatic cooling [3] and creates a highlands cold trap leading to a Late Noachian Icy Highlands (LNIH) climate model [4]. Melting to account for the abundant LN fluvial/lacustrine features comes from extreme variations in spin-axis/orbital paramenters and/or punctuated heating melting events such as impact or volcanism. The McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV) provide a similar hyperarid, hypothermal environment, a 20°C mean annual temperature, adiabatic effects, and very limited melting. We examine the MDV hydrological system and cycle to gain insight into the possible configuration of the LNIH, and develop a conceptual model for Late Noachian Mars under MDV-like conditions [5].   MDV Conditions and Application to the LNIH: In the MDV, MAT are well below 0°C producing a regional permafrost layer and a horizontally stratified hydrologic system (Fig. 1). Snow and glacial ice provide the meltwater source.  Top-down heating and melting of these ice deposits takes place when peak seasonal (PST) and peak daytime (PDT) temperatures are >0°C. Here we assume that the peak seasonal/daytime temperatures in the Late Noachian icy highlands model can rise above 0°C for limited periods and we explore the consequences of this scenario. The extended summer season on Mars approximately doubles the time when melting could take place. This meltwater forms a perched aquifer above the ice table aquilude. The resulting fluvial activity is ephemeral, but repeated yearly events can carve valleys and form lakes. Lakes are semi-permanent due to ice cover, and thus meltwater is stored there during periods when temperatures fall below 0°C. Variations in the hydrologic system are introduced by landscape-induced snow and ice dynamics (e.g., volume, altitude, and insolation geometry of flowing ice) and by small fluctuations in input parameters to solar insolation (e.g., spin axis/orbital parameters).   In the LNIH scenario, the southern hemisphere uplands would be blanketed by a layer of ice and snow tens to hundreds of meters thick [6] and snow would concentrate at high altitudes above  the +1.0 km surface ice stability line (Figs. 2-3) [4]. Below this altitude, snow and ice could also accumulate on local highs depending on local and regional topography and atmospheric circulation patterns [7]. In a steady-state situation, any surface liquid water at low-altitudes (equatorial and northern lowlands) would rapidly freeze, sublimate, and be transported back to the southern high altitudes, replenishing the snow and ice cover. The upper part of the regolith below the surface ice stability line would be dry above the top of the ice table to a depth determined by diffusive equilibrium with the atmosphere. The Noachian hydrologic system would be horizontally stratified due to the global permafrost aquiclude (Fig. 2). Repeated seasonal melting would cause warming of the cryosphere but the melting isotherm would be unlikely to penetrate deep into/through the km-thick cryosphere.  Derivation of Meltwater:  1) Regional snow and ice deposits above the surface ice stability line (Fig. 2) would undergo altitude/latitude dependent warming during each Mars summer (about 6 Earth months); 2) meltwater runoff from the ice sheet would drain and flow downslope to the edge of the ice sheet, where meltwater channels would encounter Noachian cratered terrain topography and flow across the surface forming valley networks, and around and into craters, forming closedbasin and open-basin lakes; fluvial drainage systems on top of aquicludes would be extensive, but might be poorly integrated; 3) snow and ice accumulations below the snowline would also undergo melting, producing a more integrated drainage system controlled by the presence of snow; 4) seasonal top-down heating and melting of the top tens of meters of continuous ice would produce a volume of water, based on inferred ice sheet size [6], well in excess of the total volume interpreted to have occupied open-basin/closed basin lakes [8]. Hydrological System and Cycle: 1) Meltwater would initially infiltrate into and erode the dry regolith to the top of the ice table, producing a perched aquifer and more efficient lateral erosion than deeper infiltration [9]; 2) time periods above 0°C would be long enough to cause extensive melting and runoff; 3) this Noachian icy highlands, atmospheric-surface coupling induced, adiabatic cooling effect-dominated water cycle would persist until MAT dropped to below 0°C; 4) once MAT returned to values well below 0°C at the end of warming, lower altitude/latitude snow and ice would sublimate and return to high altitudes as snow to re-establish the nominal Noachian icy highlands climate regional snow and ice deposits. Noachian Ice Sheet Melting: Fluvial Processes:  Surface melting of a Noachian ice sheet has the following consequences (Fig. 2): 1) meltwater is focused in streams near the edge of the ice sources and overland flow is thus limited to the location of the channels at the edge of the ice sheet; 2) streams therefore may be of low order (due to being linked to individual ice sheet drainage channels, not integrated overland flow) and poorly 2127.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
integrated with widths and depths significantly influenced by the shallow ice table [9]; 3) sediments are preprocessed by impact cratering, volcanic, and eolian processes; the source rocks are already highly modified; 4) stream activity acts to further physically alter the sediments, producing sorting and rounding; 5) in streams, the hyporheic zone (Fig. 1) defines the focus for chemical and isotopic exchange, and chemical weathering; 6) if simple life existed on Mars at this time, ecosystem development might be focused in streams during wet periods; on longer time scales these deposits might become ecological legacies for the sustenance and reactivation of ecosystems; 7) inter-stream areas are not significantly influenced by the fluvial phase and thus net erosion rates are minimal there and for the terrain in general.   Noachian Ice Sheet melting: Lacustrine processes:  Transported meltwater collects and resides in lacustrine environments: 1) Streams drain into local lows to form ponds and lakes, predominantly in intercrater and intracrater regions; 2) local ponds form in irregular lows from peak discharge drainage; these could contain significant amounts of solutes from erosion of surface salts and from water flushed from the hyporheic zone; 3) some depressions (typically impact craters) fill with water, breach the rim crest and drain, creating open-basin lakes; 4) closed-basin lakes (also often in craters) are formed when water flux is insufficient to fill the depression; 5) lakes are likely to be ice covered, losing ice by sublimation but adding ice by freezing of inflowing meltwater to the base or on top of the ice cover; 6) lakes can persist between periods of melting due to their ice cover; smaller ponds and lakes may disappear at these times due to sublimation; 7) the dominance of sublimation over evaporation in these lakes disfavors, but does not preclude, the formation of evaporates on the lake floors following transition to another climate regime.  Summary: Additional sources of punctuated topdown warming, the environmental effects of impact cratering events and massive volcanic eruptions, could potentially produce a short-lived warmer climate and surface hydrological activity on the multi-decadalcentennial time scale.  Regardless of the melting mechanism or its duration, the icy highlands model provides a robust mechanism for recharging highland water sources through water migration from lowland streams and lakes, back to higher altitudes to be redeposited as snow. Thus, the MDV hydrological system and cycle guidelines provide insight into a conceptual model for Late Noachian Mars under MDV-like conditions [5] and permit further testing of the LNIH [3,4] model.  References: 1) Craddock and Howard, JGR 107, 2002; 2) Craddock et al., LPSC 44, 1984, 2014; 3) Forget et al., Icarus 222, 2013; 4) Wordsworth et al., Icarus 222, 2013; 5)  Head and Marchant, Antarc. Sci 26, 2014; 6) Fastook and Head, PSS in press, 2014; 7) Scanlon et al., GRL 40, 2013; 8) Fassett and Head, Icarus 198, 2008; 9) Head and Cassanelli, LPSC 45, 1413; 10) Hynek et al., JGR 115, 2010.  Fig. 1. McMurdo Dry Valley snow and ice microenvironments illustrating the altitude dependence of meltwater sources and the horizontally stratified hydrologic system.      Fig. 2. Late Noachian Icy Highlands configuration (top) and the results of a top-down melting episode (bottom).    Fig. 3. LNIH snow and ice configuration (above ELA of +1 km) and observed meltwater features [8,10].   2127.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
