 REMOTE, IN SITU AND SYNCHROTRON STUDIES FOR SCIENCE AND EXPLORATION (RIS 4E): FIRST YEAR OF SCIENCE AND EXPLORATION. T. D. Glotch 1, M. D. Dyar 2, J. E. Bleacher 3, M. A. A. Schoonen 1,4 , N. E. Petro 3, A. J. P. Jones 3,5 , and the RIS 4E Team. 1 Stony Brook University (255 Earth and Space Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100), 2 Mount Holyoke College, 3 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 4 Brookhaven National Laboratory, 5 Planetary Science Institute  Introduction: The Remote, In Situ, and Synchrotron Studies for Science and Exploration (RIS 4E) team is one of nine nodes of NASA's Solar System Exploration and Research Virtual Institute (SSERVI). Our team is addressing key aspects of the science and exploration of the Moon, Near Earth Asteroids (NEAs), Phobos, and Deimos (the SSERVI Target Bodies). Using a comprehensive approach to better understand the spectral data of samples and surfaces, we are investigating how we will one day safely explore those surfaces and maximize our measurements of all samples, especially small, precious returned samples. RIS 4E is producing a wealth of information and a team of welltrained next generation scientists.  RIS 4E Team Research Program: The RIS 4E team consists of leading researchers at a variety of institutions (universities, NASA Centers, corporate and national research laboratories, and museums), each of which brings unique capabilities and talents to the team, ranging from laboratory analysis to field studies. The five-year RIS 4E effort is divided into four main research themes. These themes are: 1. Preparation for Exploration: Enabling Quantitative Remote Geochemical Analysis of Airless Bodies. Remote sensing enables human exploration and sample return by providing global chemical and mineral data for Target Bodies and a basis for identifying sites of maximum scientific impact for sample return. Thermal gradients and space weathering of airless bodies greatly complicate remote spectral analysis. The RIS 4E team has begun acquiring mid-IR emissivity (Figure 1) and visible-near-infrared (VNIR) spectra in simulated lunar and asteroid conditions using Stony Brook's Planetary and Asteroid Regolith Spectroscopy Environmental Chamber (PARSEC) instrument [1]. We have also begun the synthesis of plagioclase and pigeonite standards for spectroscopy and reactivity experiments [2-3] and written code for advanced spectral optimization and unmixing techniques [4-6]. Immediate future work will include space weathering experiments at Brookhaven National Laboratory. 2. Maximizing Exploration Opportunities: Development of Field Methods for Human Exploration. Science-motivated field work will help us evaluate the role of handheld and portable field instruments for future human exploration, enabling rapid, low-risk, comprehensive, and quantitative assessments of the local geology and regolith materials. These advances will quickly inform astronauts about where to go and which samples to select, and improve our understanding of how exploration plans developed based on available remote sensing data are implemented and revised in the field. The RIS 4E team has completed its first field season on the December 1974 flow on the Kilauea volcano in Hawaii. During this field deployment, the team tested the applicability of multispectral mid-IR imagery [7] for sample selection and highgrading (Figure 2) and used LiDAR to study the detailed topography of pits (see LiDAR movie of 3D pit topography at https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=kASkg7ili-M&feature=youtu.be). Returned samples are currently undergoing detailed chemical analysis using laboratory X-ray fluorescence (XRF) instrumentation, leading to handheld XRF measureFigure 1. The first emissivity spectra acquired under simulated lunar conditions using the PARSEC instrument at Stony Brook University.  Figure 2. Multispectral mid-IR image showing compositional differences between basaltic lava (purple/yellow) and ash (blue/green).  https://www.youtube.com/%20watch?v=kASkg7ili-M&feature=youtu.be https://www.youtube.com/%20watch?v=kASkg7ili-M&feature=youtu.be ments in the next field season [8]. 3. Protecting our Explorers: Understanding How Planetary Surface Environments Impact Human Health. Future astronauts will be exposed to harsh environments with potentially harmful but unknown health effects. The RIS 4E team is performing experiments to determine the reactivity and toxicity of lunar analog materials, as well as lunar and chondritic samples. Initial experiments show that agglutinated simulants lead to more cell death than non-agglutinated simulants and that simulants with high glass contents are highly reactive and lead to the generation of large quantitites of highly reactive oxygen species [9] including OH˙ and H2O2 (Figure 3). 4. Maximizing Science from Returned Samples: Advanced Synchrotron and STEM Analysis of Lunar and Primitive Materials. The National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS II) at Brookhaven National Laboratory will soon be open to conduct experiments. This next-generation light source will provide unparalleled chemical X-ray fluorescence (XRF), extended Xray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) and mineralogical X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of precious lunar and primitive materials (including future returned samples). Initial work has commenced at BNL's NSLS and Chicago's Advanced Photon Source (APS) to develop procedures and algorithms to determine elemental valence states using synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy (Figure 4); a preliminary Fe calibration for glasses has already been created [10] and applied to lunar samples [11]. The resultant optimal errors on %Fe 3+ are ±2.9, comparable to the errors associated with Mössbauer measurements. Additional work includes detailed analysis of synthetic glasses using transmission electron microscopy electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS). Outreach and Other Institute Objectives: A unique partner in RIS 4E is the Center for Comunicating Science (CCS) at Stony Brook University. The CCS is an award-winning multi-disciplinary team working to enhance the understanding of science by training scientists to effectively communicate with the public, public officials, the media, and others outside their own discipline. RIS 4E and CCS will hold a oneday science communication workshop prior to the 2015 NASA Exploration Science Forum. The CCS will also develop a course in science journalism that will engage all members of RIS 4E. This has the dual benefit of highlighting RIS 4E scientific accomplishments and actively engaging the next generation of science journalists.   In addition to the CCS, the RIS 4E Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) plan leverages the expertise of other E/PO partners, including the Next Generation Lunar Scientists and Engineers (NGLSE) leaders and the director of International Observe the Moon Night. A major objective of RIS 4E is to train the next generation of planetary scientists, especially undergraduates. We will train and foster early career scientists and provide, in addition to scientific training, professional development opportunities.  References: [1] Shirley, K. A., and T. D. Glotch (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 2025. [2] DiFrancesco, N. J. et al. (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 1804. [3] Sinclair, A. et al. (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 1494. [4] Carey, C. J. et al. (2015a), J. Raman Spec., in review [5] Carey, C. J. et al. (2015b), LPSC XLVI. [6] Carey, C. J. et al. (2015c), LPSC XLVI. [7] Ito, G. et al. (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 1548. [8] Young, K. E. et al. (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 1658. [9] Kaur, J. et al. (2015), LPSC XLVI, abstract 1142. [10] McCanta, M. et al. (2015a), LPSC XLVI. [11]. McCanta, M. et al. (2015b), LPSC XLVI. Time(minutes) 0 20 40 60 80 H2 O2 (u M) 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 Fresh crushed+4mM EDTA Uncrushed+4mM EDTA 2 day crushed+4mM EDTA 9 day crushed+4mM EDTA Inert Atmosphere Figure 3. Generation of H2O2 by fresh OB-1 lunar regolith simulant, and after crushing and after being crushed and sitting for several days. Figure 4. XAS spectra of multivalent elements in minerals and glasses. 