2179.PDF
	  QUANTITATIVE MAPPING OF MINERALS ON VESTA USING DAWN VIR DATA. S. Li1 and R. E. Milliken1, 1Department of Earth, Environmental, and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, shuai_li@brown.edu  Introduction: The howardite, eucrite, and diogenite (HED) meteorites are believed to originate from Vesta, and this remains the strongest spectroscopic link between a group of meteorites and a specific asteroid  [1]. In addition, petrologic characteristics and models suggest the HEDs may record a complex igneous history [e.g., 2]. Magma ocean modeling constrained by the HEDs’ major compositions, for instance, shows that Vesta’ crust should be 30-40 km thick in order to explain all major eucrite and diogenite lithologies [2]. Large impacts (i.e., Rheasilvia) on Vesta may be expected to penetrate through the crust and excavate olivine-enriched (i.e., > 60%-80% [2]) mantle materials, which have not yet been detected. However, olivine exposed on Vesta’s surface may not necessarily indicate a mantle origin, as significant amounts of olivine (up to ~20%) could also form by plutonic activity (in unequilibrated diogenites) [3]. In addition, unraveling the distribution of primary pyroxene compositions on Vesta’s surface could be complicated by the effects of thermal metamorphism, as suggested by the equilibration of pyroxenes in eucrites [4]. The goals of this study are to address several questions: (1) Does Vesta’s surface have similar modal mineralogy as observed in HEDs, or is it more diverse? (2) What is the distribution of intrusive versus extrusive lithologies (e.g., diogenite versus eucrite)? For ‘howardite’ regions, what are the proportions of eucrite and diogenite components? (3) What do large impacts such as Rheasilvia reveal about crustal composition? To address these questions we derive quantitative mineral maps of Vesta’s surface using data acquired by the Visible and Infrared Spectrometer (VIR) onboard the Dawn mission. Reflectance spectra of minerals are expected to mix non-linearly on Vesta’s surface at the visible to near infrared region (VNIR) due to the nature of the regolith. The mixing can be complicated by particle size, porosity, and viewing geometry. To account for these effects we utilize the radiative transfer model of Hapke in this study.  Data: Mineral endmembers used in our model are those that dominate HED samples, including clinopyroxene (CPX), orthopyroxene (OPX), olivine (Ol), and plagioclase (Plag). Reflectance spectra (0.4-2.5 µm) for these minerals are required, which we obtained from existing spectral libraries and from new measurements of diogenite components. Because reflectance features for the same mineral may vary due to composition, over 64 unique pyroxenes are included in the initial run of the model, including well-characterized synthetic pyroxenes of [7]. Ultimately, nine endmembers (4 OPX, 3 CPX, 1 Ol, and 1 Plag) are commonly picked through iteration of the Hapke model and these compositions span a variety of HED compositions (details in Li and Milliken [2014]). The VIR High Altitude Mapping Orbit (HAMO) level 1 (radiance, 0.3-5 µm, ~150 m/pixel) data are used in this study. We join VIS (acquired by the visible camera) and IR (acquired by the infrared camera) data at 1.02 µm and remove the VIS bands that overlap with the IR data. Only channels at 0.4-2.5 µm are used. We note that the VIS and IR spectra do not always align well for some pixels, complicating interpretation of the ~1 µm region. The stacked VIR radiance data are divided by the solar spectrum to convert to I/F and the Lommel-Seeliger law is used for our initial photometric correction.  Methods: In Hapke’s model, the reflectance can be described as a function of single scattering albedo (ω), cosine of solar incidence angle (i) (µ0), cosine of emittance angle (e) (µ), back scattering function (B), phase function (P), and multiple scattering function (H, down-welling H1 and up-welling H2).  R = ωave4πµ0µ0 +µ1+B[ ]P +H1H2 −1{ }  (1) where ωave = Miωii∑ , ωave  is the mixture SSA derived from spectra of VIR images; ωi  is the endmember SSA; M are endmember abundances. The detailed parameterization for ω, B, P, and H functions is the same as that of Li and Li [2011]. Mapping dominant minerals on Vesta’s surface with VIR data can be performed in two steps. The first step is to convert reflectance spectra of endmembers and those from VIR images to single scattering albedo (SSA) by solving functions between reflectance (R) and SSA (ω) (equation (1)). The trust region algorithm is used to solve these equations [5]. The second step is to derive mineral abundances by solving the linear equations ωave = Miωii∑ with least squares algorithm.  Results and Discussion: Initial results from our implementation of the Hapke model show that estimated pyroxene, olivine, and plagioclase abundances range within ±5% of modal abundances measured for HEDs [6], suggesting that the latter encompass the majority of Vesta’s surface compositions.  Estimates of clinopyroxene abundance (CPX, Figure 1) show that it is enriched outside of the Rheasilvia and Veneneia basins in the southern hemisphere and it is distributed asymmetrically in the northern hemisphere (the polar region is masked due to lack of VIR data). CPX is low within the Rheasilvia and Veneneia basins and the southwest regions outside of Rheasilvia basin (outlined by the red polygon in Figure 1). Estimated orthopyroxene abundance in the southern hemisphere (OPX, Figure 1) shows that it is enriched 2179.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
	  inside the Rheasilvia and Veneneia basins and the southwest region outside of the basins. The OPXenriched regions are strongly correlated with the CPXpoor regions, consistent with distinct lithologies. The OPX-rich/CPX-poor regions outside of Rheasilvia basin are identified as areas covered by crater ejecta in Vesta geologic maps [7], suggesting these regions may represent diogenitic materials excavated from depth and emplaced as ejecta by the basin-forming event. Olivine abundances are generally very low on Vesta’s surface. Olivine-enriched (20%-30%) sites are associated with Rheasilvia central mount in the southern hemisphere and are only detected in Bellicia and Arruntia craters in the northern hemisphere, and the latter is consistent with observations in [8]. Two locations somewhat enriched in olivine (5%-10% olivine) are observed in the northern hemisphere (Figure 1, yellow circles), which correspond to areas identified as diogenitic in composition [7]. We note that the ‘spiral’ noise patterns observed in our mapping results may be due to the simplistic photometric correction used in this initial study, which uses a constant viewing geometry for all pixels in an image cube. In summary, Vesta’s surface has similar mineralogy as HEDs, but mapped OPX abundances are at the lower limit of what is observed for diogenites, indicating possible mixing with eucritic components. The southern and northern hemispheres exhibit distinct spatial variation in surface mineralogy, likely due to the presence of large basins in the former. In the southern hemisphere, OPX and CPX are inversely correlated, indicating zones dominated by either diogenite or eucrite compositions. In the northern hemisphere, OPX and CPX exhibit a positive correlation, suggesting eucrite and howardite lithologies are dominant, which is consistent with lithologies mapped by [9]. Localized olivine-enriched (20%-30%) areas might be associated with intrusive lithologies, and thus far there is no clear evidence for olivine-enriched mantle materials exposed at Vesta’s surface. Thus, Rheasilvia likely did not penetrate through Vesta’s crust, which indicates a minimum crustal thickness of ~ 30-40km (the Rheasilvia excavation depth based on [10]). These observations are consistent with crustal thickness estimated based on recent petrologic models [2].  Conclusions and Future Work: Our quantitative mapping of minerals on Vesta’s surface with Dawn VIR data shows that most of Vesta’s surface has similar modal mineralogy as that of HEDs. Diogenite lithologies, indicated by OPX-dominated compositions, are present in the south associated with Rheasilvia, whereas there is no strong evidence for large tracts of diogenite terrains in the northern hemisphere. In contrast, portions of the northern hemisphere are relatively low in OPX and CPX, indicating spectrally neutral components (e.g., plagioclase) may be prevalent. Large areas of olivine-rich materials are not observed on Vesta’s surface, suggesting mantle material is not exposed. However, localized olivine-riched spots may represent plutonic intrusions excavated by impacts. Together, these initial results suggest Vesta’s crust is thicker than the excavation depth of Rheasilvia. Ongoing work will continue to re-evaluate our models with further calibrated VIR data (i.e., improved photometric correction and improved splicing of VIS and IR data)  Reference: [1]. McCord, T. B. et al. (1970). Science 168. [2]. Mandler, B. E. & Elkins-Tanton, L. T. (2013). MAPS 48. [3]. Beck, A. W. & McSween, H. Y. (2010). MAPS 45. [4]. Bogard, D. D. & Garrison, D. H. (2003). MAPS 38. [5]. Coleman, T. F. & Li, Y. Y. (1996). Siam J. Optimiz. 6. [6]. Li, S. & Milliken, R. E. (2014, In prep.).  In prep. [7]. Yingst, R. A. et al. (2014). PSS 103. [8]. Ammannito, E. et al. (2013). Nature 504. [9]. Ammannito, E. et al. (2013). MAPS 48. [10]. Jutzi, M. & Asphaug, E. (2011). GRL 38. [11]. Li, S. & Li, L. (2011). JGR E09001.  Figure 1. Maps of clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, and olivine on Vesta’s surface, stereographically projected; for each mineral map, northern and southern hemispheres are scaled at the same abundance range. 2179.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
