2194.PDF
Nucleus morphology and activity of comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.  H. Sierks1, C. Barbieri2, P. Lamy3, H. Rickman4, R. Rodrigo5, D. Koschny6, and the OSIRIS Team*; (1) Max-Planck-Institut für Sonnensystemforschung, Justusvon-Liebig-Weg 3, 37077 Göttingen, Germany, (2) Centro di Ateneo di Studi e Attività Spazialei “Giuseppe Colombo” (CISAS), University of Padua, via Venezia 15, 35131 Padua, Italy, (3) Laboratoire d'Astrophysique de Marseille, France, (4) Department of Physics and Astronomy of Uppsala University, Sweden, (5) Instituto de Astrofisica de Andalucia, Granada, Spain, (6) Scientific Support Office of the European Space Agency, Noordwijk, The Netherlands.   Introduction:  ESA’s Rosetta mission arrived on August 6, 2014, at target comet 67P/ChuryumovGerasimenko after 10 years of cruise. OSIRIS (Optical, Spectroscopic, and Infrared Remote Imaging System) is the scientific imaging system onboard Rosetta. It comprises a Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) for nucleus surface and dust studies and a Wide Angle Camera (WAC) for the wide field coma investigations. OSIRIS imaged the nucleus and coma of the comet from the arrival throughout the mapping phase, PHILAE landing, early escort phase and close fly-by.  The overview paper will discuss the surface morphology and activity of the nucleus as seen in gas, dust, and local jets as well as small scale structures in the local topography. Acknowledgements:  OSIRIS was built by a consortium led by the Max-Planck-Institut für Sonnensystemforschung, Göttingen, Germany, in collaboration with CISAS, University of Padova, Italy, the Laboratoire d'Astrophysique de Marseille, France, the Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucia, CSIC, Granada, Spain, the Scientific Support Office of the European Space Agency, Noordwijk, The Netherlands, the Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial, Madrid, Spain, the Universidad Politéchnica de Madrid, Spain, the Department of Physics and Astronomy of Uppsala University, Sweden, and the Institut  für Datentechnik und Kommunikationsnetze der Technischen Universität  Braunschweig, Germany. We thank the Rosetta Science Ground Segment at ESAC, the Rosetta Mission Operations Centre at ESOC and the Rosetta Project at ESTEC for their outstanding work enabling the science return of the Rosetta Mission. Additional Information:  *The OSIRIS team is H. Sierks, C. Barbieri, P. Lamy, R. Rodrigo, D. Koschny, H. Rickman, J. Agarwal, M. A'Hearn, I. Bertini, F. Angrilli, M. A. Barucci, J. L. Bertaux, G. Cremonese, V. Da Deppo, B. Davidsson, S. Debei, M. De Cecco, S. Fornasier, M. Fulle, O. Groussin, C. Güttler, P. Gutierrez, S. Hviid, W. Ip, L. Jorda, H. U. Keller, J. Knollenberg, R. Kramm, E. Kührt, M. Küppers, L. Lara,  M. Lazzarin, J. J. Lopez, S. Lowry, S. Marchi, F. Marzari, H. Michalik, S. Mottola, G. Naletto, N. Oklay, L. Sabau, N. Thomas, C. Tubiana, J-B. Vincent, P. Wenzel, Associate Scientists & Assistants. .  2194.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
