2198.PDF
INTENSE VIBRATIONS OF THE MARTIAN IONOSPHERE OBSERVED BY MARSIS ACTIVE SOUNDING DURING A SUN-EARTH-MARS CONJUNCTION.  D.  D.  Morgan1,  C. Diéval1, D. A. Gurnett1, M. Lester2 and the ISSI Working Team on the Induced Magnetosphere of Mars:  Physical Processes and Consequences3 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, U. S. 52242, e-mail: davidmorgan@uiowa.edu, 2University of Leicester, Leicester, U. K. e-mail:  mle@ion.le.ac.uk, 3 International Space Science Institute, Bern, C. H.  Abstract:  The ISSI Working Group on the Induced Magnetosphere of Mars has covered three conjunction campaigns where the Sun, Earth, and Mars are lined up radially.  During these campaigns data taken on the Sun, at Earth, and from spacecraft in solar orbit such as STEREO can be applied to events occurring in the Martian ionosphere to gauge the response to events in the solar wind more precisely than at other times when solar wind data cannot be accurately projected to Mars.  In this presentation, we apply data from several sources condensed into an ENLIL model simulation (see, e. g., [1] and references therein) of the interplanetary medium around this time, as well as data from the Mars Express spacecraft to characterize a few events in which  MARSIS Active Ionospheric Sounding, the topside sounder  on board the Mars Express spacecraft, detects intense vibrations in both locally detected electron density and magnetic field strength and remotely sensed electron density profiles near the ionospheric peak.   A summary plot of such an event is shown in Figure 1.  That these vibrations appear both locally and in the remote sensing suggests that the event is global in nature.   Figure 2 is an image from an ENLIL  model movie showing the passage of an ICME near Mars approximately one day prior to the occurrence of the oscillatory motion of the  Martian ionosphere seen in Figure 1.     Figure 1.  Upper panel:  Summary plot showing vibrations in spacecraft-local electron density (black), spacecraft-local magnetic field strength (red), and peak ionospheric electron density (blue).  Lower panel:  Cain model magnetic field strength (black), radial component (red), polar component (blue), and azimuthal component (green).       Figure 2.  ENLIL simulation frame showing ICME passage near Mars twenty-two hours prior to vibrations shown in Figure 1.     In this presentation, we will analyze data from several such events.  Our objective will be to infer the relation between vibrationally excited states of the Martian ionosphere and the impact of energetic solar wind events such as  ICMEs.  References:  [1] Jang, S., Moon, Y.-J., Lee, J.-O., and  Na, H. (2014) J. Geophys. Res—Space Physics, 119, 7120–7127, doi:  10.1002/2014JA020339.   2198.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
