2204.PDF
PHOTOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF ANALOG MATERIALS FOR ASTEROID ORGANICS.  A. Fujiwara1 and K. Kitazato1. 1Graduate School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Aizu, Fukushima, Japan (m5171130@u-aizu.ac.jp).  Introduction:  The near-infrared reflectance spectroscopy is a powerfull tool for investigating organic material on asteroid surface in remote-sensing. In fact, by its observing method, the presence of organic material on the C-type asteroids, Themis and Cybele, has been revealed [1, 2]. However, considering that C-type asteroids have the similar spectral signature with carbonaceous chondrites, organic material should exist on the other C-type asteroids as well. The cause making its detection difficult would be weakenss of absorption feature. That is higher signal-to-noise ratio than ever is required for spectroscopic approach. On the other hand, carbon content is known to have a negative correlation with surface albedo [3]. Since photometric measurement to derive surface albedo is a relatively easy way rather than detection of the absorption feature, we may be able to obtain information of organic material for more asteroids by its approach. But surface albedo changes depending on not only the composition but also the surface condition such as particle size [4]. Therefore, we consider whether it would be possible to estimate carbon content by using information of surface albedo and phase curve. The goal of this study is to examine the photometric properties of  (1) organic materials as analog of asteroid organics, (2) mixtures of organics and silicate, and (3) different sized samples for organics and silicate. Samples:  We used four natural organic samples: (1) humin acid from Albert, Canada, (2) peat soil from Scotland, UK, (3) andsol from Kanuma, Japan, and (4) bituminous coal from Omuta, Japan. Appearance of these samples is black and only bituminous coal has gloss. Also we used (5) synthetic graphite and (6) dunite from Horoman, Japan. The samples were dry sieved into size fraction of  45-53 µm. In the case of humic acid and dunite, four size fractions (45-53 µm, 53-100 µm, 100-180 µm, 180-212 µm) have been prepared to study particle size effects. Then, the sample powder was deposited in the sample holder. Excess of powder above the rim of sample holder was removed with a spatula to obtain a flat surface. Photometric Measurements:  We used the goniospectrometer developed in the University of Aizu for photometric measurments. The gonio-spectrometer can measure the spectral radiance of reflected light on the sample surface within the phase angle range from 5º to 60º. The collimate lenses are mounted on the points of optical fibers with transmitter and receiver arms. The spectrometer produced by Boehringer Intgelheim detect at the wavelength of 330-1068 nm with a sensitive surface of 6 mm in diameter. The light source is tungsten halogen lamp with 6.5 W of power output produced by Ocean Optics. The collimated light beam diameter is about 10 mm. We checked the light stabilization. The light output changes about 1% for 20 minutes.  We measured the reflectance of the samples at the phase angle from 5º to 60º with incidence angle fixed 0º. The phase angle was incremented every 1º between 5º and 10º and every 5º between 10º and 60º. We repeated to measure five times with integral time of 10 sec each phase angle. We measured the dark level determined by shutting off the light beam with a chopper in front of the laser window. The absolute reflectance in units of I/(J π cos i) by the definition of the bidirectional reflectance distribution function by Hapke (1993). I is the reflected light intensity and J is the collimated irradiance, was determined using a reflectance standard. The reflectance standard was used a Spectralon having highly Lambertian surface produced by Labsphere. Results and Discussion:  We confirmed that each sample has a different phase curve shown in Fig. 1. The albedo of all organic materials is lower than dunite and the phase function slope is steeper. It appears to become low-albedo with the increase of the humin acid fraction and steeper slope with lower albedo. In the results of dunite and graphite. We consider that the cause is the porosity of the sample with packing in the sample holder. Next, we prepared mixtures with dunite and humin acid showed the strongest backscattering properties. The mixtures are six types with different humin acid fraction: 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 wt.%. There is the tendency to lower albedo and steeper slope in the phase curves with the increase of the humin acid fraction. We found a relationship between the low albedo and the phase curve slope. Finally, we confirmed the photometric properties of different particle size with dunite and humin acid. In the results of dunite, the small particle size is higher albedo than the large particle size. On the other hand, in the results of humin acid, the small one is lower albedo than the large one.  2204.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
 Fig. 1: Normalized reflectance of natural organic samples, graphite and dunite plotted as a function of phase angle.   Fig. 2: Normalized reflectance of humic acid and dunite mixed samples plotted as a function of phase angle. Values in the legend are weight ratios of humic acid and dunite.   Fig. 3: Normalized reflectance of different sized dunite samples plotted as a function of phase angle.   Fig. 4: Normalized reflectance of different sized organic samples plotted as a function of phase angle.  References: [1] Campins, H. et al. (2010) Nature, 464, 1320-1321. [2] Licandro, J. et al. (2011) A&A, 525, A34. [3] Milliken, R.E. & Mustard, J.F. (2007) Icarus, 189, 550-573. [4] Milliken, R.E. & Mustard, J.F. (2007) Icarus, 189, 574-588. 2204.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
