2253.PDF
REGIONAL VARIATIONS INMARTIAN DEBRIS-COVERED GLACIERMORPHOLOGY, FLOWCHARACTERISTICS, AND RADAR PROPERTIES E. I. Petersen1, J. W. Holt1, R. A. Parsons2, J. S. Levy1, and E. A.McKinnon1, 1Institute for Geophysics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX (eric petersen@utexas.edu), 2Dept.of Geo/Physical Sciences, Fitchburg State University, Fitchburg, MA.Introduction: Debris-covered glacier (DCG) complexes are known to be abundant in the northern andsouthern mid-latitudes of Mars, where they are oftenfound as coalescing lobes surrounding high mesas andmassifs. Many of these lobate DCGs exhibit basal reflectors in MRO Shallow Radar (SHARAD) sounding data,consistent with a composition of nearly pure water iceunder a debris cover no thicker than 10 m [1,2]. Climatemodeling supports the hypothesis that these features arethe remnants of past high obliquity-induced glaciationin the mid latitudes of Mars [3]. In addition, ice flowmodels developed for the physical conditions relevant tolobate DCGs on the Martian surface have been able toreplicate their observed topography [4,5].Study Region: DCG complexes in the northernmid-latitude region of Deuteronilus/Protonilus Mensae(DPM) exhibit varied properties in SHARAD soundingdata. DCGs in western DPM generally exhibit clear,low angle basal reflectors, while basal reflectors areweak or non-existent for DCGs in eastern DPM (see fig.1). While similar gross morphology is observed for allDCGs in DPM (convex-up topographic profile, evidencefor viscous flow), subtle differences in topography andsurface morphology may record differing histories of iceflow/loss and debris-layer modification. These differences are explored using flow modeling and geomorphiccharacterization.Figure 1: MOLA-derived map of Deuteronilus/Protonilus Mensae with confirmed detections andnon-detections of DCG basal reflectors mapped.Selected DCG are highlighted in green boxes.Flow Modeling Methods: The Parsons flow model[4] was developed specifically for the applied stress andtemperatures relevant to ice in Martian DCGs. Themodel is set up for a given DCG lobe by defining an iceflow catchment and a flow-parallel topographic profilefrom HRSC data to calculate total ice volume as well asthe accumulation zone (parent scarp) slope. Ice is thenprecipitated onto the parent scarp and allowed to flowuntil it best matches the observed topography.The model is most sensitive to selection of ice grainsize, temperature, and assumed basal geometry. Themodel thus places first-order constraints on basal slopewhere unobserved by SHARAD, as well as providingsome insight into the emplacement conditions and glacialhistory of the region.The model is applied to three distinct lobes on eachof two DCG complexes in western and eastern DPM. Results are compared between the DCG complexes as wellas between lobes with different aspects.Geomorphology Methods: Surface geomorphologyis mapped at the tens to hundred meter scale using available HiRISE imagery over the DCG complexes. Surfacesare characterized into 8 different categories based upongeneral appearance, surface roughness, and hypothesizedformation mechanism. These broadly include brain terrain, ribbed terrain, dunes, mantle polygons, deflated andunmodified debris cover.Statistics on surface morphologies are compared between surfaces with differing aspects as well as betweenwestern and eastern DPM surfaces. Of great importanceis the distribution of surfaces with high roughness at the20m scale, which is relevant to surficial scattering of theSHARAD signal and thus reduced penetration of the subsurface.Results: Results indicate differing histories of bothice flow and debris-layer modification between the sitesin western and eastern DPM. The western DCG is eithermore ancient or exhibits a larger ice grain size (rheology) than the eastern DCG by a factor of up to 2-3 (asshown in fig. 2(D,H)). The ice grain size is limited byboundary-pinning due to dust content, and thus is indicative of accumulation conditions. These DCG were therefore either emplaced in altogether different episodes ofglaciation or represent differing local conditions duringthe same glacial period.The western DCG exhibits much thicker and morewidespread latitude-dependent mantle deposits than theeastern DCG. This serves to bury and soften the surface expression of high roughness debris surfaces suchas brain terrain, perhaps allowing for improved subsurface penetration with SHARAD.References: [1] Plaut, J., et al. (2009), GRL, 36(2).[2] Holt, J., et al. (2008), Science, 322, 1235-1238. [3]Madeleine, J.-B., et al. (2009), Icarus, 203(2), 390-405.[4] Parsons, R., et al. (2011), Icarus, 214(1), 246-257.[5] Fastook, J., et al. (2011), Icarus, 216(1), 23-29.2253.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
2Figure 2: (A) THEMIS mosaic of DCG complex surrounding a mesa in western Deuteronilus Mensae; 100m contoursfrom HRSC DTM H3249 are burgundy lines, extracted DCG flowline topographic profiles are red lines, DCG flowcatchments are black/white borders, sampled HiRISE footprints are blue, and sampled SHARAD data is mapped asyellow lines. Depth-corrected (B) SHARAD 590301 and (C) 761702; basal reflectors are indicated. (D) Best-fitParsons flow model for northeast lobe, 2◦ base, D=2mm, T=205K. (E) Sample of HiRISE PSP 006648 2255. (F-I)Same data sets for DCG in Protonilus Mensae; (F) HRSC H1525, (G) SHARAD 2816001, faint basal signal indicatedby yellow arrow, (H) 1.5◦ base, D=5mm (2.5x greater than for (D), to obtain similar timescale), T=205K, (I) HiRISEESP 036909 2265.2253.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
