2320.PDF
Evaluating the quantity of native H2 in Enceladus' plumes. A. Bouquet1,2 , T. Brockwell2, J.H. Waite2, R.Perryman21University of Texas at San Antonio, Department of Physics and Astronomy, TX 78249 2Southwest ResearchInstitute, San Antonio, TX 78228email contact: alexis.bouquet@swri.orgIntroduction: The data from Cassini-INMSmeasurements in Enceladus' plumes include detectionof H2. Presence of H2 in the plumes is an importantindicator of hydrothermal activity in Enceladus' ocean.Quantifying the amount of H2 also has implications fordetermining its role in the production of the plumes assupersaturated H2 could create the conditions foraccelerating water to the observed mach number.However, results from the various Enceladus flybysby Cassini show that the apparent hydrogen abundanceincreases with spacecraft speed. This evolution isattributed to the impact of ice grains in theantechamber of INMS [1]: the impacts on the wall ofthe antechamber expose/project fresh titanium that willreact with water to form hydrogen. The large numberof ice grains arriving during a single integration periodof INMS means that grains are going to appear in thedata as a continuous source of water, titanium, andhydrogen, complicating the determination of theamount of Ti released. This process poses the questionof how much of the detected hydrogen is native andhow much is an artifact. Data from the Cassini CAPS instrument hasallowed us to determine a distribution function of thesize of ice grains for E5 flyby (fast flyby at 17.7 km/s).In parallel, a series of impact physics computations [2]have given an estimate of the quantity of titaniumexposed/ejected by impacts. Combined these allow usto model the products of grain impacts around theclosest approach of flyby E5, especially the quantity oftitanium released. This is used an input for a surfacechemistry model of the INMS antechamber. Thismodel has been developed to consider adsorption andchemisorption effects and to follow the evolution ofsurface and gas phase species in the antechamber.Here we present a comparison of the calculated H2from this model for the grain size distribution based onCAPS data from the E5 flyby, with H2 measurementsfrom Cassini-INMS. We show how this allows us toconstrain the proportion of native hydrogen and fromthis, to make predictions as to the quantity to bedetected in the upcoming open source flyby ofEnceladus on E21.Acknowledgements: The Cassini INMS investigation is supported bycontract number 1405853 from the NASA JetPropulsion Laboratory.References: [1] Waite et al., (2009) Nature, 460(7254):p 487490. [2] Walker et al. (2014), 13th HypervelocityImpact Symposium2320.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
