2326.PDF
INVESTIGATING DUSTY PLASMA OF COMETARY COMA WITH NASA STARDUST DATA.  S.J. Pestana1,2,  S. Hoban2,  1Department of Geological  Sciences, California State Polytechnic University Pomona,3801 West Temple Avenue, Pomona, CA 91768 (sjpestana@csupomona.edu), 2Center for Space Science and Technology, University of Maryland Baltimore County, 1000 Hilltop Circle Baltimore MD 21250Introduction:  Harbingers of doom or prophesy forthe ancient peoples  of Earth,  comets are now understood to be primordial fragments from our Solar System's birth composed of various ices and dust species.Among the questions surrounding comets and their elusive character are the properties and processes of therarefied  gasses  and  disperse  dust  that  surround theirsolid nucleus. Dusty,  or  complex, plasmas have been studied inlaboratory environments and are thought to exist naturally in several types of space environments. The comasurrounding  comet  nuclei  have  been  identified  as  apossible home for dusty plasmas [1]. Within a  complex plasma,  dust  particles  that  become charged  can begin to  interact  with each other,and the system as a whole can exhibit properties suchas self-organization  and  wave propagation  similar  tothat  seen in a  liquid  or  an atomic crystalline lattice.These structures have been called "plasma crystals" or"coulomb lattices" [2].Hypothesis:  Coulomb  lattice  structures  withincomplex  plasmas  can  exist  in  the  coma surroundingcomets.  The conditions that  allow these structures toform would be intact at 1.9 AU from Sol as was cometWild  2  when  the  Stardust  spacecraft  performed  itsflyby.  At this distance  perturbation  by solar  wind isminimal yet there is enough solar energy for the sublimation,  photodissociation  and  photoionization  processes of the comet's ice to produce the dusty plasmaenvironment conducive to coulomb lattice formation.Methods:  NASA's Stardust spacecraft performed aflyby of  comet  81P/Wild (Wild 2)  in  2004 and  collected data on the distribution, mass and compositionof dust particles surrounding the comet in addition tocollecting and returning to Earth physical samples ofcomet and interstellar  dust.  Data from the Dust FluxMonitor Instrument (DFMI) and the Cometary and Interstellar  Dust  Analyzer  (CIDA)  mass  spectrometerwill be used to develop a profile of dust properties thatsurround Wild 2.A generic comet model to approximately match thegeometry [3]  and orbital  position of  Wild 2 at  Stardust's encounter will be developed to create a baselinefor  the properties  of  the comet  coma and its  plasmacomponent. For this model, the plasma is assumed tobe composed of photoionized hydrogen from gaseouswater  that  has  sublimated  and  been  photodissociatedfrom the comet's surface.To  determine  the  existence  of  coulomb  latticestructures within this idealized comet model based onWild 2,  coulomb coupling parameters  will be  calculated for varying cases.Preliminary Results: Development  of  the  cometdusty plasma model is ongoing. Data from Stardust'sDFMI, a polarized plastic (PVDF) sensor system thatdetects  impacts  of  particles  within  different  massthresholds,  is  presented  below. This  chart  shows themass and spacial distribution of collisions that were detected within a 1 kilometer radius sphere around thecomet nucleus.Significance: Understanding  the  space  that  surrounds comet nuclei will shed light on some of the dynamic processes that define the near-nucleus comet environment. If the complex plasma in the comet coma isfound to be a home of plasma crystals, that would provide further opportunities to observe these macroscopicphenomena in a natural setting. The results of this research can later be compared to further in situ exploration  by  other  spacecraft  such  as  ESA's  ongoingRosetta mission.References: [1]  Mendis,  D.A.,  and  M.  Horányi(2013), Dusty Plasma Effects in Comets: Expectationsfor Rosetta, Reviews of Geophysics, 51, 53-75. [2] Vasut, J., Hyde, T.W., Barge, L., (2002) Finite coulombcrystal  formation,  Advances  in  Space  Research 34:2396-2401.  [3] Sekanina, Z., et al. (2004),  Modelingthe Nucleus and Jets of Comet 81P/Wild 2 Based onthe  Stardust  Encounter  Data,   Science, 304  (5678):1769-1774.2326.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
