 THE ORIGIN OF PEAK-RING BASINS: OBSERVATIONAL FRAMEWORK AND PATH FORWARD IN CONSTRAINING MODELS OF IMPACT-BASIN FORMATION.  David M. H. Baker and James W. Head, Dept. of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912;  (david_baker@brown.edu).  Introduction: Impact basins provide windows into a planetary body's crustal structure and stratigraphy; however, interpreting the origin of impact basin materials requires constraints on the processes controlling basin formation and morphology. Peak-ring basins (exhibiting a rim crest and single interior ring of peaks) provide important insight into the basin-formation process, as they are transitional between complex craters with central peaks and multi-ring basins. Recent remote sensing datasets from instruments onboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO), MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER), Chandrayaan-1, and Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) spacecraft have permitted a reassessment of the origin of peak-ring basins [e.g., 1-6]. This reassessment has resulted in an observational framework for validating and refining current models of impactbasin formation. The following summarizes key observations of peak-ring basins on the Moon and Mercury, including comparisons with numerical models [e.g., 7-9] and paths for future model refinement.  1. Shape of Impact Basins: The final topography of peak-ring basins is unique compared with smaller complex craters and defined by five major features: rim crest, basin wall, floor annulus, peak ring, and central floor. These features have been qualitatively and quantitatively described in detail [1-4]. Due to the large vertical scale of impact-basinforming events and limitations of model spatial resolution, most studies employing hydrocode models have not focused on quantifying the surface topography of the final impact basin. However, overthrusting of the collapsed central peak over the transient crater wall in current numerical simulations often results in a peak ring configured as a broad mound with a steeper outward face and more gradually sloping inward face [7-9]. This is inconsistent with present observations. The discrepancies in topographic profile occur in the upper few kilometers of the simulated event, which are comparatively small in context of the kilometers-scale translations that make up the bulk of numerical models. Improved resolution and focus on the final surface profile of impact basins in numerical models will improve quantitative comparisons and more rigorous testing of the final basin topography predicted in models with that characterized from orbital data.  2. Central Peak/Peak-Ring Dimensions: Observations indicate an abrupt transition in peak morphology with crater size at the onset of peak-ring basins.  This is apparent in the trends in diameter of central peaks and peak rings with crater size, which show that peak diameters diverge along separate trends [1-4]. There is currently no systematic analysis quantifying how the morphometric dimensions of central peaks and peak rings evolve with crater size in numerical models. The preliminary work by [7] showed that a discontinuity between the diameters of central peaks and peaks rings is not predicted because peak rings are formed as part of a continuum of central-peak formation. As a result, current numerical models often predict wider central peaks than empirical measurements [7]. It is also unclear if protobasins, which are abundant on Mercury [1] and possess both a central peak and peak ring, can be produced and are predicted in current numerical models. As such, systematic, quantitative comparisons between measurements of observed peak dimensions (e.g., height and diameter) and model predictions over the full sequence of peak morphologies are needed.   3. Impact Melt:  Observations demonstrate the importance of impact melting in modifying the interiors of peak-ring basins [1-4]. An increase in impact-melt production with crater size is inferred to result in a number of morphological changes, including an increase in ratios of the floor area to interior area and deepening of the basin centers with increasing basin size [3-4]. Impact melting has also been suggested to be the driver of peak-ring formation [10]. In numerical models, impact melting does not exhibit a large influence on the formation of central uplifts [7-9]. Instead, the centrally melted portions of the transient cavity are dominated by the substantial uplift that is produced from floor rebound during crater and basin formation. The post-impact modification of the basin interior topography by cooling impact melt is also not currently incorporated in numerical models. Further assessment of the role of impact melting in modifying the interior morphologies of complex craters and peak-ring basins would shed light on current inconsistencies between models and observations. 4. Peak-Ring Sampling Depth and Physical Characteristics: The sampling depth, or stratigraphic uplift, of central peaks within complex craters has been a focus for understanding crustal stratigraphy on planetary bodies. Many authors have used estimates of the maximum depth of melting as a constraint on central-peak sampling depth [e.g., 11]. The sampling depth of peak rings is less understood, as the mechanism for peak-ring formation is still debated. Hyperspectral images of peak rings on the Moon show peak rings to be composed of massive outcrops of pure anorthosite [5]. This observation indicates a relatively shallow sampling depth for peak rings on the Moon if pure anorthosite is concentrated in the upper crustal layers (< 25 km) [12].  Numerical models have predicted a greater sampling depth for impacts the size of peak-ring basins on the  Moon [7], although a systematic study describing stratigraphic uplifts and material types for these basin sizes has not been conducted. More explicit model predictions of sampling depth of central peaks and peak rings for a range of target and impactor conditions are needed, with more emphasis on non-terrestrial bodies. Important are estimates of peak-shock pressures and the physical characteristics of lithologies predicted to comprise the peak ring.  5. Deep Crustal and Mantle Structure: Measurements of the gravity and crustal structure of peak-ring basins on the Moon using GRAIL and Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) data indicate that central mantle uplifts and annuli of thickened crust are characteristics that basins acquire from their onset [6]. Comparisons between the morphometric positions of the peak ring and rim crest with the crustal and mantle structure interpreted from GRAIL gravity show regular spatial patterns that are at odds with those predicted in the few numerical models of lunar impact basins available for these crater sizes [e.g., 8]. The diameter of the mantle uplift for all peak-ring basins correlates well with the diameter of the peak ring [6]; in the numerical models, the diameter of the mantle uplift is consistently smaller than the peak-ring diameter [7-9]. The annulus of thickened crust surrounding the mantle uplift is observed to be thickest midway between the rim crest and the peak ring and extends from the edge of the mantle uplift to near the rim crest [6]; in the numerical models, the annulus of thickened crust reaches a maximum beneath the peak ring and extends outward to near the location of the contact between the basin wall and floor [7-9]. Possible reasons for these discrepancies include assumptions used in the Bouguer gravity model for crust-mantle topography, differences in dilatancy and compaction within the target post-impact [8], or the effects of thermal gradients with depth [13-15]. More recent numerical models incorporating the post-impact isostatic adjustments of select lunar impact basins [16] have been successful in producing the gravity patterns revealed by GRAIL. Reconciling remaining differences in the predicted topography of the crust-mantle interface, particularly in the transition to peak-ring basins, should provide important clues for refining current numerical simulations and interpretations/models of gravity data over large impact basins on the Moon and other planetary bodies. 6. Faulting: Important components of realistic models of impact basin formation are the development and kinematic influences of faults. Impact-basin features formed and modified to some degree by faulting or mass wasting processes, such as the rim crest, wall terraces and steep walls of central peaks and peak rings are currently not included in numerical models as discrete, fault-produced features. However, progress is being made in incorporating dilatancy and other models to improve the handling of shear localization and production of fault-like structures [17]. Field studies of terrestrial impact structures also demonstrate the importance of faulting and folding in accommodating the three-dimensional inward collapse of the transient cavity walls [e.g., 18]. Improved numerical models incorporating the localization effects of faults on transient weakening and transient cavity collapse should improve the kinematic predictions of peak-ring formation and comparisons with observed locations of ring structures.  7. Transient Weakening Mechanisms: It is clear from multiple lines of evidence that in order for the transient cavities of complex craters and basins to collapse into their present states, a substantial impact-induced weakening mechanism must occur.  However, uncertain has been the mechanism(s) driving this target weakening. While our observational framework does not provide direct evidence for a particular weakening mechanism, it should be able to help to constrain key input parameters that are most important in current implementations of target weakening models. For example, in the approach of [9], a range of reasonable acoustic fluidization parameters could be explored to try and fit simulated impact basin shape to observed morphometric relationships. Summary:  A number of key observations have been made of craters and basins at the onset of peak-ring basins that provide an observational framework for testing current models of impact-basin formation on the Moon and Mercury.  The comparisons discussed above identify current uncertainties in numerical models that can be improved with future refinement and validating with the observational framework.  References: [1] Baker, D.M.H. et al. (2011) Planet. Space Sci., 59, 1932-1948. [2] Baker, D.M.H. et al. (2011) Icarus, 214, 377-393. [3] Baker, D.M.H. et al. (2012) JGR, 117, E00H16. [4] Baker, D.M.H. and Head, J.W. (2013) Planet. Space Sci., 86, 91-116. [5] Baker, D.M.H. et al. (2013) LPS 44, no. 2734. [6] Baker, D.M.H. et al. (2013) Large Meteorite Impacts and Planetary Evolution V, no. 1737. [7] Collins, G.S. (2002) Ph.D. Dissertation, Imperial College, Univ. of London, 235 pp. [8] Collins, G.S. (2013) LPS 44, no. 2917. [9] Wünnemann, K. et al. (2005) Large Meteorite Impacts III, 67-83. [10] Head, J.W. (2010) GRL, 37, L02203. [11] Cintala, M.J. and Grieve, R.A.F. (1998) Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 33, 889-912. [12] Pieters, C.M. et al. (2013) LPS 44, no. 2535. [13] Potter, R.W.K. et al. (2012) GRL, 39, L18203. [14] Potter, R.W.K. et al. (2012) JGR, 118, 963-979. [15] Miljković, K., et al. (2013) Science, 342, 724-726. [16] Freed, A.M., et al. (2014) JGR, 119(11), E004657. [17] Johnson, B.C. et al. (2015) LPS 46, this volume. [18] Osinski, G.R. and Spray, J.G. (2005) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 40, 1813-1834. 