2384.PDF
INSIGHTS FOR CHEMISTRY AT MARS: INTEGRATING ATMOSPHERIC MEASUREMENTS FROM MAVEN NGIMS AND IUVS INTO A 1-D PHOTOCHEMICAL MODEL.  M. Matta1, P. Mahaffy2 and the NGIMS team, J. Evans3, N. Schneider4, B. McClintock4, I. Stewart4, G. Holsclaw4, J. Clarke5, J. Deighan4, B. Jakosky4. 1Center for Space Physics, Boston University (725 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, MA 02215, e-mail: majdm@bu.edu) , 2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, 3Computational Physics, Inc., Springfield, VA, 4Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, Boulder, CO, 5Astronomy Department, Boston University, Boston, MA.  Introduction:  The Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution (MAVEN) mission is measuring the ionized and neutral species in the Martian atmosphere below the exosphere using both in situ and remote sensing techniques. The MAVEN Neutral Gas and Ion Mass Spectrometer (NGIMS) instrument has a detection range spanning 2 to 150 amu and is making measurements of ion and neutral species’ concentrations with altitude during nominal science orbit as well as during the deep dip campaigns. With inter-instrument cross calibration, the NGIMS measurements will be converted into profiles of number density vs. altitude for a range of observed ion and neutral species.  The MAVEN Imaging and Ultraviolet Spectrograph (IUVS) instrument uses both high and lowresolution modes to determine the radiance of atomic and molecular species in the martian atmosphere. A subset of the IUVS remote sensing team efforts includes retrieving the brightness of species along scans across the limb and corona of Mars. Using the Generalized Retrieval and Analysis Tool (GRANT) [1], the brightness of select neutral and ion species (CO2, CO, N2, O, N, C, CO2+, and C+) are  each converted into a profile of number density vs. altitude.  Science Goals: The measurements made by the MAVEN NGIMS and IUVS instruments and modeling tools will be used in tandem to strengthen the interpretation of the observations. Goal 1: Cross-instrument calibration will be made by comapring results from the IUVS retrieved profiles and  NGIMS measurements for overlapping species at complementary altitudes. Figure 1 shows the altitudeaveraged number of counts per second of CO2+ ions detected by the spectrometer in its open source ion mode, with a 5 km altitude spacing, for MAVEN orbit 109. GRANT-retrieved CO2+ density from modeled data are shown in Figure 2. Once reliable retrievals are obtained from IUVS observations, these retrieved CO2+ profiles will be used for cross-instrument comparisons. The scale height of CO2+ above 200 km, measured by NGIMS, is 34 km. The scale height of GRANT-modeled CO2+ density at 140 km,  is 30 km.  Goal 2: The Boston University Mars Ionosphere Model (BUMIM) is a one-dimensional photochemical model that generates ionospheric density profiles as a function of altitude for a given neutral atmosphere [2]. The neutral composition and density measurements made by both NGIMS and IUVS will be used to constrain the neutral atmosphere in the BUMIM. Ionospheric composition and density profiles from NGIMS and IUVS will be compared with resulting modeled ionospheric profiles to provide insights into the key chemical reactions in the martian atmosphere at ionospheric altitudes.  Figure 1. NGIMS measured CO2+ ions in open source ion mode, averaged over each 5 km grid between 185 and 560 km. A red line is the best linear fit to the averaged data with a slope of 34 km. The observed fluxuation of ions with altitude occurs along the spacecraft track and is not attributed to noise.  Figure 2. GRANT-retrieved CO2+ ion density profile based on model values. The scale height at 140 km is ~30 km. References: [1] S. Evans et al., (2015), LPSC XLVI, this conference. [2] Matta et al. (2013), The composition of Mars' topside ionosphere: effects of hydrogen, J. Geophys. Res. 118, p. 2681 – 2693, doi: 10.1002/jgra.50104 2384.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
