2385.PDF
UNRAVELING CURIOSITY OBSERVATIONS OF SEDIMENTARY ROCKS AT KYLIE.  R.M.E. Williams1, D. Rubin2, S. Gupta3, J.P. Grotzinger4, K.M. Stack-Morgan5, L. Edgar6, M. Rice7, D.Y. Sumner8, K. Lewis9, F. Calef5, 1Planetary Science Institute, 1700 E. Fort Lowell, Tucson, AZ 85719, williams@psi.edu, 2UC Santa Cruz, 3Imperial College, 4Caltech, 5Jet Propulsion Lab, 6USGS, Flagstaff, AZ, 8UC Davis, 9Johns Hopkins University.   Introduction:  Along the ~5 km route from Yellowknife Bay (YKB) to the Pahrump Hills, the Curiosity rover stopped to conduct contact science at only four waypoints [1] to assess geomorphic units identified in orbital mapping [2].  Prior to drilling at the Kimberley waypoint, the first drill site after YKB, Curiosity crossed the Kylie basin, which is topographically higher (by ~10 meters) and ~300 m north of the Kimberley, and shares the same succession of geomorphic units identified in satellite images.  Mastcam images acquired during the five sol period (550-555) that Curiosity passed through the Kylie basin yielded key sedimentary and stratigraphic observations, and laid the groundwork for the drill campaign at the Kimberley.  Kylie Facies and Stratigraphic Relationships:   Inside the basin, the largest areally exposed facies has decimeter-thick, south-dipping beds of cross-bedded sandstone (Fig. 1A) that correspond to distinct NE-SW trending linear bands in orbital images [3].  These sandstone beds are inclined 5-15 from horizontal, indicating a transport direction from the north with some sediment possibly derived from the crater rim [4]  At Kylie the first three-dimensional observations of these south-dipping sandstones revealed a characteristic clinoform (S-shape) cross-sectional geometry (Fig. 1A).  "Rollover" from topsets to forests is observed (Fig. 1B), but in most places the topsets are not preserved, resulting in stacked ridges that appear 'striated' in orbital images.  We interpret these inclined strata as down-current slope deposits, where a flow decelerates in a standing body of water forming a delta [5].    Superposing the eroded clinoforms is a thin-bedded sandstone facies with beds that exhibit opposing dip directions (both north and south dips; Fig. 1C), an indication of bi-directional flow [6].  We interpret this facies as eolian deposits and note similar draping relationships in modern eolian drifts [6].   These facies are overlain by a planar, thin-bedded sandstone and capped by massive sandstone, as best exposed in the southeastern Kylie wall (Figs. 2 and 3).  The planar bedded sandstone forms a resistant bench that rims portions of the southern basin corresponding to the orbitally mapped 'rugged' unit [7]; the drill site at the Kimberley (Windjana hole) is also part of this geomorphic terrain type [3].  The planar bedded sandstone has centimeter scale spherical protrusions that are relatively uniform in size and dispersed throughout the outcrop, observations that suggests these nodules may be diagenetic concretions similar to those seen at other locations by Curiosity [8].  Multiple views of a prominent butte in northeastern Kylie permit the tracing of layers.  The upper two facies (massive sandstone and thinly-bedded, cross-bedded sandstone) are laterally continuous and superpose the south-dipping sandstone (Fig. 3B).  However, a conglomerate facies appears to pinch out.  Close-up MAHLI images of the conglomerate facies at Bungle Bungle (sol 550) show the sedimentary texture. This conglomerate facies is faintly bedded, poorly sorted with subangular to subrounded clasts (Diammax = 5 cm), consistent with rapid deposition in a fluvial system. Exposed on the northwestern basin wall is a fining upward sequence: pebbly conglomerate, thin-bedded sandstone and upper massive sandstone (Fig. 3A).  The conglomerate facies forms a prominent bench that rims the northern Kylie basin with an apparent ~11 dip to the north, similar to the regional dip.  This poorly sorted conglomerate has angular to subangular clasts, and is interpreted as a fluvial deposit.  Discussion:  Kylie sedimentary rocks are various sandstone and conglomerate facies reflecting dominantly fluvial-lacustrine environments.  Subaqueous deposition was intermittent, with subaerial exposure, erosion and eolian reworking of fluvial deposits resulting in a complex, interfingered stratigraphy. Inferred diagenetic nodules in some layers suggest a post-depositional active groundwater system.  The overall stratigraphic succession at Kylie matches that observed elsewhere in the vicinity (e.g., Moonlight Valley, Kimberley), although there is an elevation offset [5].  The Kylie sedimentary rock record is part of a broader depositional sequence in a southward prograding subaqueous system.   The repetitive nature of the strata and the apparent eolian reworking suggests cyclicity of depositional sequences.   References: [1] Vasavada et al. (2014) JGR 119, 1134-1161. [2] Calef, F. J. et al. (2014) GSA, Abstract #255-1. [3] Rice, M. et al. (2014) GSA Abstract #2027. [4] Lewis, K. et al. (2015) LPSC. [5] Gupta, S. et   al. (2014) AGU, Abstract #P42C-02. [6] Rubin, D. et al. (2014) GSA Abstract #202-3. [7] Stack, K. et al. (2014) GSA Abstract #202-4. [8] Stack, K. et al. (2014) JGR, 119, 1637-1664.  2385.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  Figure 1: Sol 554 Mastcam mosaic with view to east.  A) Along-strike view of south-dipping (to the right)  sandstones.  B) "Rollover" of topsets to foresets (red arrows).  C) North and south dipping beds.  Figure 2:  Contact relationships for south-dipping sandstones (foreground), thin-bedded sandstone (middle) and massive sandstone (image top) are exposed in southeastern Kylie. Sol 554 Mastcam mosaic with view to southeast.   Figure 3:  Representative Kylie stratigraphic columns at different cardinal directions:  (left to right) northwest (Wilson Cliffs), northeast,  southwest, and southeast.  2385.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
