2388.PDF
INSIGHTS GAINED FROM CONSERT MEASUREMENTS DURING PHILAE'S DESCENT ONTO  67P/C-G'S SURFACE.  D. Plettemeier1, C. Statz1, J. Abraham1, V. Ciarletti2, R. Hahnel1, S. Hegler1, A. Herique3, P. Pasquero3, Y. Rogez3, S. Zine3, and W. Kofman3, 1Technische Universität Dresden, Germany, (dirk.plettemeier@tu-dresden.de), 2LATMOS / IPSL, UVSQ, UPMC, Paris, France,  (valerie.ciarletti@latmos.ipsl.fr), 3UJF-Grenoble 1 / CNRS-INSU, Institut de Planetologie et d'Astrophysique de Grenoble (IPAG) UMR 5274, Grenoble, F-38041, France,  (wlodek.kofman@obj.ujf-grenoble.fr)    Introduction:  The main scientific objective of the Comet Nucleus Sounding Experiment by Radiowave Transmission (CONSERT) aboard ESA spacecraft Rosetta is the dielectric characterization of the nucleus of comet 67P/Chuyurmov-Gerasimenko. This is done by performing bi-static sounding between the lander Philae launched onto the comet's surface and the orbiter Rosetta. For the sounding, the CONSERT unit aboard the lander will receive and process the radio signal emitted by the orbiter part of the instrument. It will then transmit a signal back to the orbiter to be received by CONSERT. This happens at the milliseconds time scale. Attitude Reconstruction: During the descent of lander Philae onto the comet's surface, CONSERT was operated as a bi-static RADAR. From peak power measurements (see fig. 2) of the dominant direct path during the descent, the knowledge of the orbiter and lander positions and simulations of CONSERT's orbiter and lander antenna characteristics, we were able to reconstruct the lander's attitude and estimate the spin rate of the lander along the descent trajectory (see fig. 1). Additionally, certain operations and manoeuvres of orbiter and lander, e.g. the deployment of the lander legs and CONSERT antennas or the orbiter change of attitude in order to orient the science towards the assumed lander position, are also visible in the data. The information gained on the landers attitude is used in the reconstruction of the dielectric properties of 67P/CG's surface and near subsurface (metric to decametric scale) and will hopefully prove helpful supporting the data interpretation of other instruments. Surface Permittivity Mapping: In the CONSERT measurements, the comet's surface is visible during roughly the last third of the descent enabling a mean permittivity estimation of the surface and near subsurface covered by the instruments footprint along the descent path. The comparatively large timespan with surface signatures exhibits a spatial diversity necessary for the mapping of dominant signatures and the estimation of the dielectric properties of prominent features yielding a possible contrast and permittivity mapping of the comet's surface in the vicinity of the original landing site.   Fig. 1: Measured lander rotation period during the descent as a function of time.   Fig. 2: Maximum peak power of the CONSERT signal between lander and orbiter as function of time during the descent.  Acknowledgements: Rosetta is an ESA Cornerstone Mission. Philae is a DLR/CNES lander. The research on the CONSERT experiment is supported by funding from the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR). 2388.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
