2410.PDF
MINERAL AND OTHER MATERIALS MAPPING OF CRISM DATA WITH TETRACORDER 5.  R. N.Clark1, G. A. Swayze2, S. L. Murchie3, F. P. Seelos3, K. Seelos3, and C. E. Viviano-Beck3.  1Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ,  2U.S. Geological  Survey, Denver,  CO,  3Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory,Laurel, Maryland.Introduction:  The search for minerals and othermaterials  from  the  wealth  of  imaging  spectroscopydata  being  returned  from  Mars  poses  a  formidabletask.  Most recent mapping has required human intensive massaging/filtering of image cubes and mappingby parameters [1, and references there in].   The newCRISM Map-projected Targeted Reduced Data Record(MTRDR) image cubes [2]  enable a  new sophistication in detection and mapping of materials.  We havedeveloped a  new version  of Tetracorder  [3]  that  expands capabilities and wavelength range allowing formore capability of the expert system used for identification and mapping of materials in CRISM data.The new system includes automated  curved continua  to detect  trace  compounds  whose spectral  features are superimposed on other spectral features.  Forexample,  curvature  of thermal  emission  spectra  andwater absorption spectra in the 3 to 4-micron region orabsorption  by broad  2-micron  pyroxene bands  causefalse  positives  when  searching  for  spectral  featuresthat  are  narrow on the scale of the curvature  of thecontinua.  Curved continua reduces false positives, enabling weaker spectral features to be detected.We are assembling a new expert system for materials mapping on Mars that includes successful and extensively field checked expert systems that  have beenused for mapping minerals, organics and other materials  with  terrestrial  imaging  spectrometers.   We cannow search hundreds of minerals, amorphous materials, organic and inorganic chemical compounds in under 30 minutes per CRISM scene using a standard PCwith an Intel I7 CPU. Tetracorder:  Tetracorder [3] is an expert systemthat  applies  multiple  algorithms  to  identify spectralfeatures. The main identification algorithm is a modified least  squares  system that  compares  spectral  features to a spectral library and includes areal as well asintimate mixtures and coatings.  Overlapping absorption  bands  can  be detected as  mixtures  (example  inFigure  1  showing  epidote,  prehnite  and  epidoteprehnite mixtures in a Martian crater).Subtle band shifts  of spectral  features  have beenshown  to  change  with  chemistry  enabling  smallchanges  in  chemistry  to  be  mapped  with  imagingspectroscopy [3], for example, aluminum substitutionsin muscovite, or solid solution series, for example NaK alunite.  We show changes in the wavelength position of adsorbed H2O around 1.9 microns in Figure 2.Results:  The  CRISM  MTRDR  merged  imagecubes [2] register the short and long wavelength channels of the instrument,  allowing a full spectral analysis,  from the  near-UV to 4-microns.   This  includesbroad  spectral  features  that  bound the  short  to longwavelength  channels,  such as olivine and  magnetite,both of which abundantly map.In  scenes studied  so far,  adsorbed water  is  common, but the band positions vary with local mineralogy (Figure  2).   Olivine,  pyroxene,  magnetite  andFe3+-bearing  minerals  are  widespread.   Consistentwith  previous  studies,  alunite,  chlorite,  nontronite,and Fe, Mg-bearing phyllosilicates are found.To date,  no organic compounds have been found,though some spectral  structure  is  observed in  the 3micron region.   Organic chemicals could survive forperiods after  exposure,  for example,  due to a  recentlandslide.  Solar UV will erode organic chemicals onthe surface, so none are expected to survive for longperiods.The latest mapping results will be presented at themeeting.References: [1] Viviano-Beck, C. E., et al. (2014),Revised  CRISM  spectral  parameters  and  summaryproducts based on the currently detected mineral  diversity on Mars, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 119, 1403–1431, doi:10.1002/2014JE004627.  [2] Seelos, F. P., M. F. Morgan, H. W. Taylor, S. L.Murchie, D. C. Humm, K. D. Seelos, O. S.  Barnouin,C.  E.  Viviano,  and  C.  R.  I.  S.  M.  Team  (2012),CRISM  Map  Projected  Targeted  Reduced  DataRecords (MTRDRs) – High level analysis and visualization data products, in Planetary Data: A Workshopfor Users  and  Software  Developers,  U.S.  GeologicalSurvey, Reston, Va.  [3] Clark, R.N., Swayze, G.A., Livo, K.E., Kokaly,R.F.,  Sutley, S.J.,  Dalton,  J.B.,  McDougal,  R.R.,  andGent,  C.A.,  2003,  Imaging  spectroscopy:  Earth  andplanetary remote sensing with the USGS Tetracorderand expert systems, Journal of Geophysical Research,Vol.  108(E12),  5131,    doi:10.1029/2002JE001847,p. 5-1 to 5-44, 2003. 2410.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Illustration 1: Figure 1.  CRISM Tetracorder mineral map of epidite, prehnite, and epidoteprehnite mixtures.Illustration 2: Figure 2.  CRISM Tetracorder map of absorbed water at seven positions from 1.91to 1.94 microns.  The 2.02 micron absorption position is due to water ice.2410.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
