2412.PDF
EVIDENCE FOR MULTIPLE MELTING EVENTS IN PORPHYRITIC CHONDRULES FROM LL3.00 SEMARKONA.  Bastian Baecker, Alan E. Rubin and John T. Wasson. Department of Earth, Planetary and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA. (b.baecker@ucla.edu)  Introduction. Almost all chondrules have experienced multiple melting events; the first preserved event is the one that produced a moderately large fraction of melt, sufficient to produce a spheroidal shape via surface tension. Wasson et al. [1] described a low-Ca pyroxene grain in a porphyritic pyroxene (PP) chondrule in Semarkona that recorded eight overgrowth layers produced during secondary melting events after the initial melting. The melt fraction produced in the later events was small, and mainly confined to mesostasis. These observations are consistent with the view that all nebular heating mechanisms are point or line sources, and thus all produce lower temperatures in chondrules farther from the heat source. To provide more-detailed evidence to support this model we have run numerous profiles perpendicular to the layering in Semarkona chondrule low-Ca pyroxene grains that show multiple overgrowths. For a variety of reasons some profiles show complex zoning patterns, but others show the sawtooth pattern predicted by our model. Zoning profile predicted by the overgrowth model.  Chondrules cooled too quickly to allow complete crystallization of the melt. It is because of limited crystallization that most high-FeO chondrules preserve moderate amounts of glassy mesostasis.  During the cooling phase following each melting event, crystallization of limited amounts of new mafic minerals occurs until diffusion is too slow to permit the diffusion of constituents. At this time the boundary layer is enriched in FeO compared to more distant mesostasis. Our working model is that each new heating event melts all the high-FeO-rich mesostasis in the boundary layer and variable fractions of the low-FeO mesostasis. In more-extreme cases a thin layer of the adjacent mafic phenocryst may also melt.    Fig. 1. Sketch showing a hypothetical symmetric sawtooth pattern in a low-Ca pyroxene phenocryst with overgrowth layers caused by a series of secondary chondrule-heating events that only melted mesostasis. The vertical scale is logarithmic.  Fig. 1 shows the sawtooth pattern predicted by a simple mesostasis-melting model. The first low-Ca pyroxene (or olivine) to crystallize has low-FeO; fractional crystallization causes the FeO in the melt to increase gradually; the same is true for CaO. Thus, the next layer of pyroxene to crystallize is richer in FeO and CaO. During the next chondrule melting event, the melted mesostasis experiences moderate mixing so that FeO and CaO in the boundary layer is low again. This process gives rise to a sawtooth compositional zoning pattern. The actual pattern depends on diffusion rates through the melt and the three-dimensional structure. Because very little CaO enters the low-Ca pyroxene during crystallization, the increase in the CaO content of the pyroxene inversely reflects the decrease in the amount of melt. The rate of increase in FeO is coupled to the change in MgO, as depicted on the logarithmic scale; its slope normalized to the mean is less than that of CaO.  Measured zoning profiles. The first zoning profiles we measured was for a low-Ca pyroxene phenocryst in chondrule E4m in the AMNH 4182-2 section of Semarkona [1]. Several sawtooth patterns were visible, but they were not systematic. Our interpretation is that, despite the discernibility of its eight hexagonally oriented overgrowth layers, the presence of relict grains and the occurrence of some diffusion during late heating events led to a complex record. We therefore searched for phenocrysts in other chondrules that might show the sawtooth pattern and soon found a candidate phenocryst in chondrule D9v in the same Semarkona section (Fig. 2). One area (inset on lower right) in this phenocryst also records eight or nine overgrowth layers; the layers vary greatly in thickness depending on the amount of heat deposited in the chondrule during secondary heating events.     Fig. 2. Low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts in chondrule D9v in Semarkona. There are nine overlying BSE-dark and BSE-bright sets of overgrowths. aug = augite; mes = mesostasis; px = low-Ca pyroxene; olv = olivine. BSE image.  2412.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
The promising region is in the NW corner of the phenocrysts in Fig. 2. We used the UCLA JEOL electron microprobe to run three parallel profiles; we enhanced the Ca signal with a high-efficiency PET detector. One of the profiles was slightly displaced from the others. In Fig. 3 we show mean FeO, CaO and Cr2O3 concentrations for the two identically oriented profiles.  We will discuss the profile in the direction from Y to X. Between 60 and 38 µm are two "plateaus"; the one on the right has higher FeO showing that this was not the original center of a simple system. The three sawtooth patterns have minima at 38, 26 and 16 m with all three elements increasing to the left. Maxima occur at 30, 18 and 4 m.  The last Ca peak (at 4 m) is very high. We suggest that this records a relatively large melting event that also melted some Ca-pyroxene.    Fig. 3. Zoning profiles of FeO, CaO and Cr2O3 across the pyroxene grain shown in the NW part of Fig. 2. The traces are 61 µm long; the step size is 2 µm; the vertical scale is logarithmic (to enhance the visibility of relative change). The X and Y points in the profile correspond to the X-Y line across the BSE image in Fig. 2. Concentrations of CaO and Cr2O3 have been multiplied by the factors indicated.  Interpretation of the profiles. Almost all porphyritic chondrules record many heating events. These chondrules contain relict grains; some of the chondrules have lost volatiles, and the immiscible melts within them (i.e., plagioclase-rich silicate and metalsulfide) have separated. The porphyritic chondrules have experienced many heating events intense enough to melt some or all of the mesostasis and associated metal-sulfide assemblages. Our working assumption is that the remelted mesostasis mixes, but this may not always occur. Some chondrules and some parts of chondrules have experienced a simpler history than others. The region in D9v that yielded the data in Fig. 2 experienced a simpler history than is recorded in profiles across other overgrowth layers. Regions such as this are the best suited to infer the formational history of the chondrule. Our interpretation of Fig. 3 is that this part of the D9v phenocryst experienced three heating events that melted most of the mesostasis. In the phenocryst illustrated in Fig. 2, these events resulted in overgrowth layers that had thicknesses of 8, 8 and 12 m in the plane of the section; actual thicknesses were probably slightly larger. It is possible that the small inflections visible for all three elements at 6 and 32 m indicate smaller events that mainly melted FeO-rich mesostasis. We suggest that 8 m is the thickness that needs to be reproduced by theoretical and laboratory simulations. As discussed by [2] the chondrule cooling rates implied by 8-m sized overgrowths are two or more orders of magnitude faster than those based on furnace experiments that attempted to reproduce chondrule textures during single melting/cooling events of batches of precursor dust. It would be good to carry out laboratory simulations of these mesostasis melting events in order to infer cooling rates and thus place constraints on the environment where chondrules formed. To date no equipment has been developed to allow precise control of high cooling rates (thermal inertia is a major problem) but, given enough funding and researcher dedication, it should be possible. Summary. Pyroxene grains within porphyritic chondrules in primitive chondrites such as LL3.00 Semarkona record multiple overgrowth layers that seem to have formed following heating events that melted only the mesostasis. These events require very high cooling rates and a less-opaque nebula than needed to provide the slow cooling rates inferred from furnace experiments. The pyroxene overgrowths are easily recognized in BSE images. However, compositional profiles do not always show simple patterns. We searched for and found one region that preserves the expected sawtooth pattern in FeO, CaO and Cr2O3. These are the patterns that need to be simulated in the next generation of laboratory experiments. However, it will not be cheap or easy to carry out the simulations in the cooling-rate range inferred from the observed narrow (ca. 8 m) overgrowth layers. Reference: [1] Wasson J. T. et al. (2014) LPS 45, Abstract# 2883 pdf
. [2] Wasson and Rubin (2003) GCA 67, 2239. 2412.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
