2433.PDF
OPTICAL CONSTANTS OF IRON AND NICKEL METAL FROM 0.16 TO 3.6 µm.  David T. Blewett1, Joshua T.S. Cahill1, Nhan V. Nguyen2, Alex Boosalis2,3, Samuel J. Lawrence4, Brett W. Denevi1.  1Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, 20723, USA;  2Semiconductor Electronics Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Md.; 3University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Ne., USA;  4Arizona State University, Tempe, Az., USA. (david.blewett@jhuapl.edu).  Optical Constants and Reflectance Spectrometry of Planetary Surfaces: Accurate interpretation of reflectance spectra for airless bodies such as the Moon, Mercury, and asteroids requires proper accounting for the effects of opaque metals. Opaque metals are often found as native igneous phases in meteorites and on planetary surfaces in the form of grains significantly larger than the wavelength of the incident light. However, smaller (nanophase) iron metal grains are a key by-product of space weathering and introduce confounding effects on ultraviolet (UV) to mid-infrared (MIR) spectra as seen in the laboratory and in remotely sensed datasets (e.g., M3, LROC, and Diviner). Knowledge of the optical properties of these metals is necessary for effective spectral characterization and theoretical modeling analysis of mixtures that contain these constituents. Measured optical constants of iron are presently available in the literature [1-4], however these data sets have various drawbacks with respect to use in planetary reflectance modeling. For example, spectral resolution and range of wavelength coverage are less than ideal, and the extent to which the metals were exposed to the atmosphere are poorly documented. Here we report new measurements of the optical constants of iron and nickel metal for the UV, visible (VIS), and near-infrared (NIR), with hyperspectral sampling. The data should enable substantially improved modeling of space weathering and compositional mapping for a variety of airless Solar System bodies.  Measuring Optical Constants: The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has devised a novel method for measuring optical constants of metals. First, a coating of high-purity iron is vacuumdeposited on one surface of a fused-silica prism in an electron-beam evaporator. Next, careful design of the prism's angles and knowledge of the optical constants of the fused silica allow the measurement of n and k to be done within the prism, such that fused silica is the ambient medium. The light interacts only with the "inside" surface of the iron film in contact with the prism, which is not exposed to the atmosphere. For comparison, we also measured the optical constants of bare metal films that were exposed to the atmosphere of the laboratory. Measurements from 160 to 1700 nm were performed with a variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (VASE) [5]. Our data is at far finer sampling in wavelength (1 nm) than the data reported previously [1-4]. We have now made additional measurements with an IR VASE to determine the optical constants to ~3.6 µm. This long-wavelength limitation is imposed by the transmission of the fused-silica prism. In addition, we have measured the optical constants of pure nickel metal over the same wavelength interval.  Our measurements of the optical constants of metals exposed to and protected from the atmosphere reveal that oxidation rapidly affects the reflectance properties of iron and nickel. As suggested by Gaffey [6], such oxidation may alter the reflectance properties of extraterrestrial materials (metal-bearing meteorites, lunar samples) that are measured in the laboratory.  Application in Radiative-Transfer Models: We have used these new data to simulate varying degrees of space weathering on reflectance spectra for a variety of common airless body minerals and mixtures (olivine, pyroxene, and plagioclase). The modeling was performed using Hapke's equations [7, 8]. In Figs. 1 and 2 are plots of model spectra that illustrate the effect of 0.5 wt.% nanophase metal on the spectral properties of an orthopyroxene. Figure 1 is for nanophase Fe. The effect of oxidation of the Fe film is apparent by the overall lower reflectance of the spectrum computed with the air-exposed optical constants (orange curve) compared to that with the protected (prism) values (black curve). The contrasting optical properties of Ni metal are illustrated by comparing Fig. 1 with the plot in Fig. 2, which is for a hypothetical surface where the nanophase metal is pure Ni. The spectra modeled with the prism and air-exposed Ni values (light blue and orange, respectively) show effects of oxidation similar to those seen with Fe: higher reflectance when the optical constants of the oxidized metal are used.  Future work: The use of effective-medium theory (e.g., [9]), would permit the optical constants of ironnickel alloys to be estimated. This is of interest because the native metal found on meteorites is composed of the Fe-Ni alloys taenite (~20-65% Ni) and kamacite (~5-10% Ni). Future work with a prism made of an IR material (e.g., ZnSe or Ge) would allow the optical constants of iron and nickel to be measured with an IR VASE at wavelengths to ~20 µm or beyond. Such data in the thermal-infrared portion of the spectrum are needed for 2433.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
modeling of the emittance of a planetary surface [8], and are relevant for observations from instruments including LRO Diviner Radiometer, OSIRIS-Rex OTIS, and BepiColombo MERTIS.  References: [1] R. Paquin (1995), in Handbook of Optics, McGraw-Hill. [2] P. Johnson and R. Christy (1974), Phys. Rev. 9. [3] M. Deeter and D. Sarid (1989), Appl. Opt. 28. [4] M. Ordal et al. (1985), Appl. Opt. 24. [5] J. Cahill et al. (2012) GRL 39. [6] M. Gaffey (1986), Icarus 66. [7] B. Hapke (2001), JGR 106. [8] B. Hapke (2012), Theory of Reflectance and Emittance Spectroscopy, Cambridge UP. [9] D. Aspnes (1982), Am. J. Phys. 50.     Fig. 1. Model reflectance spectra for orthopyroxene, with 0.5 wt.% nanophase Fe, computed with the model of [6]. Curves calculated with various values of the optical constants of iron are shown: Black = the present work (prism values), orange = present work (Fe film exposed to the air), blue = Johnson and Christy [2], green = Paquin [1].                Fig. 2. Model reflectance spectra for orthopyroxene, with 0.5 wt.% nanophase Ni, computed with the model of [6]. Curves calculated with various values of the optical constants of nickel are shown: light blue = the present work (prism values), orange = present work (Ni film exposed to the air), blue = Johnson and Christy [2], green = Paquin [1].           2433.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
