2441.PDF
A GEOCHEMICAL SIGNATURE FOR MARTIAN NEAR-SURFACE ALTERATION IN THE TISSINT METEORITE: EVIDENCE FROM THE VOLATILE INVENTORY IN SHOCK MELT GLASS. C. R. Kuchka1, C. D. K. Herd1, E. L. Walton1,2, Y. Chen3, and Y. Liu3. 1Dept. of Earth & Atmospheric Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, 2Dept. of Physical Sciences, MacEwan University, Edmonton, Canada, 3Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.  Introduction: The Tissint meteorite fell into the Moroccan desert in the morning of July 18, 2011, with the first pieces of the meteorite collected a few months later [1]. The conditions of the fall were favorable: terrestrial contamination is likely insignificant. This meteorite is only the fifth witnessed Martian fall and has been the target of several studies investigating the possibility that a geochemical signature of Martian near-surface alteration processes may be preserved within the meteorite, a signature that would otherwise be erased by terrestrial alteration during an extended residence on Earth. [1] examined Tissint shock melt glass, and observed an enrichment in LREE and a positive Ce4+ anomaly, interpreted to be a contribution from near-surface alteration on Mars. [2] also examined Tissint glass, but found no LREE enrichment or Ce4+ anomaly. Shock melt pockets form by various mechanisms such as grain-boundary frictional melting, shock concentration along boundaries of minerals with contrasting shock impedance, and void collapse [3]. Void collapse is the most likely mechanism to trap alteration products, as these materials would be concentrated in voids and cracks within the pre-shocked rock [1]. It is possible that alteration products are heterogeneously trapped within the meteorite; such heterogeneity may be responsible for the contradictory observations made by [1] and [2]. Alternatively, local-scale variations in shock melt composition resulting from variations in the conditions of formation may be the cause. Here we investigate the volatile contents of typical Tissint shock melt pockets in order to explore these variables and shed light on the preservation potential for a geochemical signature characteristic of the Martian near-surface. Methods: Shock melt pockets were imaged using a Zeiss EVO SEM. Mineralogy and phase compositions for were determined by Raman, EDS, and WDS. Shock melt glass composition was determined using a JEOL 8900 EPMA at the University of Alberta. Four shock melt pockets were selected for SIMS analysis. These shock melt pockets contained varying abundances of crystallites and sulfide droplets, and each contained glass, in which volatile and refractory elements are most likely to be trapped [1]. Glass was analyzed using a Cameca IMS 7f-GEO ion microprobe at the California Institute for Technology. The sample was polished, carbon-coated, then stored within the SIMS instrument under high vacuum (1×10-8 torr) for 3 days prior to analysis. The vacuum during analysis was 2-3×10-10 torr. A 5-6 nA, 10 µm diameter Cs+ primaryion beam was used for pre-sputtering; beam diameter was reduced to 2 µm during analysis. Each spot was pre-sputtered for several minutes and ion images of 16O1H- were manually inspected to avoid cracks, holes, and crystallites. A raster size of 25×25 µm was used for pre-sputtering, reduced to 10×10 µm during analysis, from which an electron gate limited the collection of ions to the center 8×8 µm. Ion species analyzed included 12C-, 16O1H-, 18O-, 19F-, 30Si-, 31P-, 32S-, and 35Cl-. Following SIMS, each analysis spot was inspected in transmitted and reflected light and by SEM.   Figure 1: BSE image of a shock-generated melt pocket in Tissint. Following melt generation, the pocket has quenched to a mostly homogeneous glass. Pits indicate spots targeted by SIMS for elemental concentration; larger pits were targeted for δD values. δD values for spots marked by diamonds are highlighted in Fig. 4.   Figure 2. Water content within shock melt glass in Tissint. Traverses are labelled in Figure 1. Water content decreases when approaching the large vesicle. 2441.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  Figure 3. Chlorine in Tissint glass is positively correlated with water for all melt pockets analyzed.   Figure 4. δD vs. 1/H2O for shock melt glass in Tissint plots on an isotopic mixing line (red). Data plotted in numbered diamonds are labelled in Fig. 1 and plot along a degassing trend.  Results and Discussion: EPMA demonstrated a basaltic composition for shock melt glass, consistent with the melting of local igneous phases. In all melt pockets analyzed, no overabundances were observed for minor elements P, Cl, or F that could indicate a melted soil component as suggested by [4]. SIMS results demonstrate that within all shock melt pockets analyzed, chlorine exhibits a strong correlation with water (Fig. 3). This correlation is not observed for fluorine, sulfur, or phosphorus. Water content within shock melt pockets is heterogeneous, ranging from <100 ppm up to several thousand ppm. Within the shock melt glass seen in Fig. 1, water concentration decreases as the vesicle is approached (Fig. 2). δD values for Tissint melt glass exhibit a negatively-sloping trend against 1/H2O (Fig. 4) which indicates a mixing line between two isotopic reservoirs; high δD values are consistent with the Martian crust and atmosphere [5,6,7]. High δD values also suggest the absence of terrestrial weathering, which would trend towards low δD and low 1/H2O. Several data plot off of the δD vs. 1/H2O line: towards the vesicle in Fig. 1, glass becomes drier and isotopically heavier. This trend, towards higher δD and 1/H2O, is likely a consequence of devolatilizing water to the vesicle while the shock melt pocket was molten. Fractionation must have been rapid, as shock melt pockets cool on the order of seconds to minutes [8]. A positive correlation for Cl and water (Fig. 3) suggests that Cl followed water when originally introduced into the rock. As this strong correlation was not observed for water and F or P, the water and Cl content within Tissint glass cannot be explained by melting of igneous phosphates (particularly apatite). Instead, the water and Cl in Tissint shock melt pockets is most likely a remnant geochemical fingerprint of aqueous, hydrothermal, or alteration processes on Mars. This is a secondary signature that overprints the igneous chemistry of the rock; this signature is most likely derived from processes affecting the rock in the Martian nearsurface after the rock’s igneous crystallization but prior to the ejection event. Conclusions: Tissint demonstrates an absence of significant terrestrial contamination. Water content is variable by up to hundreds of ppm within the same shock melt pocket. Within one melt pocket, water content is spatially anticorrelated with proximity to a large vesicle. This may be a function of prolonged cooling, in which volatile elements may be lost to cracks or vesicles before quenching completed. Water in Tissint melt pockets exhibits mixing from two H isotope reservoirs. These reservoirs are consistent with Martian sources of water such as the atmosphere and the crust. Some shock melt pockets in Tissint contain a geochemical signature characteristic of Martian alteration products, seen primarily in water and Cl concentrations. The distribution of such melt pockets is likely heterogeneous within the host rock as cracks and voids that hosted these alteration products preferentially melted as the shockwave passed through the rock, inducing void collapse. It is unclear at this time if this volatile signature is also correlated with LREE enrichment or a Ce4+ anomaly as observed in Tissint melt glass by [1]; analyses of REE for shock melt glass examined here are planned. Acknowledgments: The authors thank Y. Guan for analytical support and assistance associated with SIMS. The authors thank Y. Liu for providing ion probe time, which was instrumental to this work. References: [1] Chennaoui Aoudjehane H. et al. (2012) Sci. 338, 785–788. [2] Barrat J.A. et al. (2014) GCA, 125, 23–33. [3] Sharp T.G. and DeCarli P.S. (2006) MESSII, 653–677. [4] Rao, M.N. et al. (1999) Geophys. Res. Lett. 26, 3265-3268. [5] Owen, T. et al. (1998) Sci. 240, 1767–1770. [6] Webster, C.R. et al. (2013) Sci. 341, 260-263.  [7] Greenwood et al. (2008) Geophys. Res. Lett. 35, 5203. [8] Shaw and Walton (2013) MAPS, 48, 758-770. 2441.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
