 MORPHOMETRY OF RECENT SIMPLE CRATERS ON MARS: SIZE AND TERRAIN DEPENDENCE W. A. Watters (wwatters@wellesley.edu), L. Geiger, M. Fendrock, R. Gibson; Department of Astronomy, Wellesley College We examine the morphometry of  N  = 384 relatively well-preserved  simple  impact  craters  on  Mars  using high-resolution stereo topography (≥ 1 m/px) [1].  In particular, we characterize the dependence of morphometric parameters on crater diameter (25 m <  D < 5 km) as well as geologic setting and modification state. This work also provides a comparison of two popular methods used to generate topography from high-resolution stereo images [1]. Motivation. The majority of studies of simple crater morphometry on Mars from the past decade have used elevation models derived from laser altimetry [e.g., 2, 3, 4].   More recent studies have made use of roverbased observations and high-resolution orbiter imagery [e.g., 5, 6].  With the advent of stereo imagery from the High-Resolution  Imaging  Science  Experiment (HiRISE) on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) [7], it has become possible to generate elevation models with a resolution of 1 m/px [8, 9].  With these new products,  we can examine transitions in crater  shape with unprecedented detail in a global crater population, as well as the size-dependent scaling of fine-scale features such as rim shape.       Our goals in this work are to (a) refine constraints for crater formation models by characterizing the size dependence of crater  and rim shape; (b) characterize the "initial condition" of crater shapes in different settings on Mars for the purpose of (c) understanding how short-  and long-term surface processes  modify crater shape and drive the evolution of the martian surface. Methods. We used the open source Ames Stereo Pipeline 2.0 to generate our elevation models [9]. We have characterized  the  difference  between  these  products and HiRISE Team-published products generated using the proprietary SOCET SET tool [8], finding an average pixel-to-pixel elevation discrepancy of < 0.5 m (after rotation and translation of the crater model to match the orientation as well as the centroid of the rim planform).  We use in-house Python scripts to extract the crater rim and radial elevation profiles, and to measure morphometric parameters in a mostly automatic fashion [10].      We compute  all  of  the  following morphometric quantities: (a) cavity volume; (b) rim diameter; (c) rimto-floor depth;  (d)  curvature  radius  of  rim walls;  (e) vertical  angular span of the crater  rim; (f) crater  rim and flank slopes; (g) rim height; and (h) exponent of power-law fit to crater cavity cross-section.  We also characterize  crater  modification  state  and  record  the terrain  type  using  a  global  geologic  map (e.g.,  lava flows and plains, coarse sediments, fine sediments, impact units) [11].  We examine in detail the dependence of all morphometric quantities (a-h) upon crater diameter as well as geologic setting and modification state. The latter is assessed by characterizing the preservation of ejecta and presence of crater cavity fill.  Our approach is to measure the distribution of values for each morphometric parameter from craters in different categories  of  modification state  and  target  materials, and draw comparisons using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to determine whether any two distributions exhibit a statistically-significant difference.  Results. The average curvature radius of the upper rim wall follows a well-defined scaling law up to  D ≈ 1 km (see  Fig.  1).   For  larger  sizes,  this  quantity  increases abruptly (crater rims sharpen significantly; see Fig. 1).  We also find that rim and flank slopes increase with crater diameter until D ≈ 1 km, where super-critical slopes are reached (see Fig. 2).  That is, repose-angle slopes on the uppermost rim wall occur at diameters comparable to the aforesaid rim shape transition diameter.  We therefore suggest that additional gravitydriven wasting of the rim walls occurs for D ≥ 1 km, which in turn presages the more dramatic simple-complex transition at somewhat larger diameters.    We find that scaling laws formerly derived from simple  craters  in  Mars  Orbiter  Laser  Altimeter (MOLA) along-track profiles and elevation models [2, 3,  4],  when  extrapolated  to  the  small  crater  size regime, tend to significantly overestimate small crater depth and volume.  Scaling laws for this small crater regime (D < 1 km) agree most closely with the early estimates of R. J. Pike [12] based on photoclinometric and shadow-length measurements, who found that d ~ 0.2Dm where m ≈ 1 for rim-to-floor depth  d.       In agreement with prior studies, we find that the ratio of rim-to-floor depth over diameter (d/D) is larger, on average,  in stronger materials such as lava plains units.  We also find that many craters in the ice-rich northern plains exhibit features  of craters  forming in high-strength materials, suggesting strong materials at shallow  depths  in  these  regions.   Craters  exhibiting ejecta  with  lobate  margins  have  the  steepest  flank slopes, consistent with the suggestion that these craters are affected by landsliding of flank materials [13].    Rim height and floor depth are strongly and positively  correlated  for  highly  pristine  craters,  and  this correlation weakens sharply as modification increases. Rim heights  show a  relatively  weak  dependence  on  modification state  when compared with crater  depth, suggesting that burial rather than erosion is the more efficient  modification process  affecting overall  crater shape. At low latitudes (in the absence of  shallow subsurface ice), crater rim walls tend to flatten rather than become more rounded as they are modified in the short term, which suggests that back-wasting of crater walls dominates  at  early  times,  rather  than  a  diffusive process  such as soil  creep  (which may dominate the long-term modification and lead to rounding of crater rims).      The initial shape of crater cavities is intermediate between  conical  and  paraboloidal,  with  an  average power-law exponent of  ≈1.75.  Small craters tend to be more conical (typical of Odessa-style low-velocity impacts).   This is unlikely to be the result  of strong drag on small objects in the thin martian atmosphere, but may result from contamination of our data set at small sizes by remote secondary craters. (Obvious secondary craters in prominent rays have been excluded). Paraboloidal craters also tend to form more commonly in  high-strength  targets.   Finally,  craters  tend to  become more paraboloidal or super-paraboloidal with increasing modification. Fig. 1:  Log-log plot of curvature radius of upper rim wall (ξc) versus crater diameter (in meters).   "R&C" refers to the "ridge-and-chute" morphology commonly observed  on  upper  crater  walls  and  associated  with landsliding.  Square  markers  (<  0.5C)  indicate  that these features were observed around less than 50% of the crater rim circumference, and circles (> 0.5C) indicate that they were observed around more than 50% of the  crater  rim  circumference.   The  diameter  dependence is well-described by a power law for D < 1 km, above which crater rims tend to be sharper (upper rim wall is flatter) in an azimuthally-averaged sense.  Fig. 2: Uppermost crater wall slope (φc2) versus log of crater diameter in meters.  On average, rim wall slope increases with diameter but does not attain super-critical slopes (above typical repose angles) in significant numbers except for D > 1 km, coincident with the rim shape transition shown in Fig. 1.   The meaning of the modification states "highly", "moderately", and "least" are defined in [1]. Future work.  This work has established the baseline variation of morphometric properties of relatively recent  simple  impact  craters  on  Mars  for  comparison with other populations.  Ongoing work has characterized  the  morphometry  of  recent  secondary  impact craters  and  the  size-dependent  scaling  of  crater  rim planforms.  Going forward, our goal is to characterize the long-term modification sequence of small craters in a  wide  range  of  surface  environments.   Our  understanding of the observed transition in rim shape will benefit from a similar analysis of small lunar craters. References: [1] Watters, W.A. et al., J. Geophys. Res.  Planets,  2015 (accepted).  [2] Garvin, J. et al.,  Icarus, 144, 2000; [3]  Stewart,  S.  & G. Valiant,  Meteor.  & Planet. Sci. 41, 2006; [4] Robbins, S and B. Hynek, J.  Geophys. Res. Planets, 117, 2012;   [5] Daubar, I. J., et al. J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 119, 2014. [6] Golombek, M.  et  al.,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets,  119,  2014;  [7] McEwen,  A.  et  al.,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets,  112, 2007; [8]  Kirk et  al.,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets 113, 2007;  [9] Moratto, Z.,  et al.,  LPSC 41, #2364, 2010; [10]  Geiger,  L.,  Wellesley  College  Honors  thesis, 2013; [11] Tanaka et al.,  USGS sci. investigation map #3292,  2014;  [12]  Pike,  R.J.,  LPSC 11,  1980;  [13] Barnouin-Jha,  O.S.  et  al.,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets, 110, 2015. 