 ORIGINS OF IMPACT-RELATED MAGNETIZATION AT THE SLATE ISLANDS IMPACT STRUCTURE, CANADA. S. M. Tikoo1,2 (smtikoo@berkeley.edu), N. L. Swanson-Hysell1, L. Fairchild3, P. R. Renne1,2, and D. L. Shuster1,2, 1Department of Earth and Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 2Berkeley Geochronology Center, Berkeley, CA 94709, 3Carleton College, Northfield, MN 55057.  Introduction: The ubiquity of cratering events in the solar system motivates understanding how the magnetizations of planetary surfaces are affected by hypervelocity impacts. Target rocks may be fully or partially remagnetized by impacts in several ways. Shock heating may impart thermoviscous remanent magnetization (TVRM) as rocks cool below their respective Curie temperatures. Passing shock waves may instantaneously impart target rocks with shock remanent magnetization (SRM) which can, in principle, be preserved if a region does not experience substantial impact-related heating.  In addition, rocks may acquire crystallization remanent magnetization (CRM) through the creation of new ferromagnetic minerals during post-impact hydrothermal activity.  In particular, while SRM has been proposed as an explanation for enigmatic magnetizations observed at impact craters and in extraterrestrial samples, SRM has not yet been conclusively identified in natural samples. At present, the most suggestive evidence for naturally occurring SRM exists at the Slate Islands Impact Structure, Canada. We have obtained new 40Ar/39Ar ages for the impact event which are consistent with a previous estimate of ~450 Ma [1].  The islands represent the ~8 km diameter central uplift of a ~30 km diameter complex crater. Target rocks, which consist of Archean metamorphic rocks, Paleoproterozoic sedimentary rocks, and ~1.1 Ga Keweenawan Mid-continent Rift dikes and lava flows [2], contain a pervasive impactrelated secondary magnetization component [3,4] which is not present in coeval rocks of corresponding lithologies outside the impact crater [5]. Our paleomagnetic study aims to determine whether the Slate Islands overprint is an SRM.  Paleomagnetic results: Target rock samples were collected from 18 igneous dikes and 17 lava flows across the impact structure from regions which experienced variable (2-20 GPa) shock pressures ([6]; Fig 1). We also sampled 10 clastic impact breccia dikes (Fig. 1). Thermal and alternating field (AF) demagnetization experiments were conducted on sister specimens from each sample.  Impact breccia dikes. After removal of small viscous contamination from the present local field, AF and thermal demagnetization typically revealed a high coercivity (HC) and high unblocking temperature (HT) magnetization which was blocked up to the magnetite Curie temperature (~580°C). Intra-site samples yielded statistically identical HC/HT magnetization directions, irrespective of whether they were collected from breccia clasts or matrix (Fig 2). This indicates that emplacement of these breccia dikes was accompanied by frictional heating above ~580°C which completely remagnetized both the clasts and matrix. The HC/HT magnetization component was also unidirectional across all impact breccia sites, suggesting that this remanence was not acquired in a transient impactgenerated field (which would be expected to have different orientations in different regions of the impact structure [7]). Therefore, the mean breccia dike HC/HT magnetization direction (D = 78°, I = 56°, α95 = 6°, which agrees with the direction previously obtained by Halls [3,4]) reflects the orientation of the geomagnetic field at the time of the impact (Fig. 2).   Fig. 1. Map of the Slate Islands Impact Structure central uplift depicting estimated shock pressures (interpolation of petrologic shock barometry data from [6]), paleomagnetic sampling locations, and lithologies of collected samples.     Target rocks: igneous dikes and lava flows. Samples collected from areas which experienced shock pressures between 4-20 GPa contained a secondary low coercivity (LC) and low temperature (LT) overprint which has overlapping coercivities and unblocking temperatures with pre-impact HC/HT magnetization components. In general, the LC/LT component is totally removed by AF levels reaching several tens of mT and temperatures approaching ~250-450°C (Fig. 3). Mean LC/LT magnetization directions obtained from these igneous dikes and lava flows are similar to the HC/HT direction of the impact breccia dikes (Fig. 2).   Testing the shock remanent magnetization hypothesis: Our goal was to determine whether the LC/LT component observed in Slate Islands target rocks is an SRM. CRM may be precluded as the impact-related overprint is not held by secondary minerals such as hematite. Therefore, the overprint is either the product of SRM or shock heating-induced TVRM. Below we discuss our approaches to distinguish between these two possibilities: (i) Because SRM is acquired during passage of the initial shock wave, it will be acquired prior to crater modification. During crater modification, target rocks (and the SRM overprints contained within them) would undergo substantial tilting, resulting in scattered magnetization directions. Therefore, the tight clustering of the LC/LT magnetization between sites and its directional similarity to the HC/HT component of the impact breccias suggests that the Slate Islands overprint was mostly acquired after post-impact tilting, thus favoring a TVRM origin. (ii) The post-shock bulk temperatures of basaltic rocks which have experienced transient pressures <20 GPa are estimated to be <~350°C [8]. Therefore TVRM in our igneous dike and lava flow samples would likely be removed from samples at similarly low temperatures during laboratory heating. Because SRM is not a thermally activated remanence, it may inhabit a wide range of unblocking temperatures (approaching the Curie temperature) during thermal demagnetization [9]. Therefore, the removal of the Slate Islands LC/LT component by ~450°C (well below the 580°C Curie temperature of magnetite) again favors a TVRM origin.  (iii) Because the acquisition efficiency of SRM is lower than thermal remanence [10], the paleointensity obtained for an SRM would likely be at least an order of magnitude weaker than the geomagnetic field (~3070 µT). We retrieved a ~30 µT anhysteretic remanent magnetization (ARM) paleointensity for the LC/LT component, again consistent with TVRM. Conclusions: The relatively tight directional clustering, relatively low unblocking temperature (compared to the primary magnetization), and the geomagnetic field-strength paleointensity of LC/LT magnetization components tentatively favor a TVRM origin for the pervasive secondary magnetization component observed in target rocks at the Slate Islands Impact Structure. Future work assessing overprint directions in the context of shatter cone orientations (see [4]) and primary Keweenawan directions will provide further tests for the SRM hypothesis. References: [1] Dressler B. O. et al. (1999) Geol. S. Am. S. 339, 109-124. [2] Kerrigan M. C. et al. (2014) LPS XLV, Abstract #1588. [3] Halls H. C. (1975) Nature 255, 692-695. [4] Halls H. C. (1979) Geophys. J. Roy. Astr. S. 59, 553-591. [5] Swanson-Hysell N. L. et al. (2014) Geochem. Geophy. Geosy. 15, 2039-2047.  [6] Dressler B. O. et al. (1998) Contrib. Mineral. Petr. 130, 275-287. [7] Crawford D. A. and Schultz P. H. (1993) Int. J. Impact Engng. 14, 205-216. [8] Stewart S. T. et al. (2007) LPS XXXVIII, Abstract #2413. [9] Tikoo S. M. et al. (2013) LPS XLIV, Abstract #2354. [10] Gattacceca J. et al. (2008) Phys. Earth Planet. Inter. 166, 1-10.  Fig. 2. Equal area plot of mean directions for impact-related magnetizations at the Slate Islands. Gray symbols represent site mean directions obtained using principal component analysis. Color symbols represent Fisher mean directions for all sites corresponding to a given lithology (circles = igneous dikes, triangles = lava flows, diamonds = impact breccias).    Fig. 3.  Thermal demagnetization of a Slate Islands lava flow sample.  Open and closed circles represent projections of the natural remanent magnetization vector onto the vertical (UpE) and horizontal planes (N-E), respectively.  Blue and red arrows denote LT and HT components, respectively.  Selected thermal steps are labeled.   