2486.PDF
HIGH Mg CHONDRITIC MICROMETEORITES AND SCORIACEOUS MICROTEKTITES FROM WEATHERING PITS ON ISOLATED GRANITIC SUMMITS IN THE GOIÁS STATE, CENTRAL BRAZIL.  M.. Matteini1, N. Hauser1, F. A. Cuadros1, S. Reyes1, and M. Demontis2, 1 Institute of Geosciences, University of Brasilia, Campus D. Ribeiro, Brasilia, Brazil (massimo@unb.br), 2  Earth Science Department, University of Cagliari, Italy.  Introduction: We found a relatively high abundance of micrometeorites and microtektites accumulated in weathering pits formed on the summits of isolated granitic outcrops in the Goias state, central Brazil. These outcrops are located far from important cities and industrial plants so that we can assume a minimal anthropogenic contamination. We sampled three pits that were isolated from any evident local drainage system; for each pit we collected the lower part of the material filling each cavity The hypothesis is that these negative structures accommodate atmospheric fallout with a preservation mechanism similar to that proposed for the Transantarctic Mountains collection [1]. The materials in the pits was characterized by grain-size from gravel to silt derived both by weathering of the bedrocks and by atmospsheric fallout.  Methods:  We studied the particles from the fraction <100 m where apparently most of the microspherules concentrated. We found at the moment a total of 48 microspherules that were recognized in part as mircometeorites and in part as microtektites. The micrometeorites during the hand-picking were easily recognized by their perfect spherical shape and smooth surface, while microtektite presented subspherical shape and scoriaceous surface. The sectioned and polished microspherules were studied using back-scattered electron images using a QUANTA Scanning Electron Microscope at the Institute of Geosciences (IG) of the University of Brasilia (UnB). Quantitative microanalyses were obtained using a JEOL electron microprobe also at IG-UnB. Samples and results: Different types of microspherules have been recognized on he basis of external morphology, internal structures and chemical composition. A group of micrometeorites (Figure 1, ab) characterized by abundant spherical vesicles and a glass matrix with abundant oxides (probably magnetites and spinels). The chemical composition, obtained with a spot size of 10 m, is very similar in all the micrometeorite of this group, with 44% SiO2, 10% Al2O3, 11% MgO, 16% FeO, 10% CaO, 1,5% K2O, 2% Na2O. A group of scoriaceous highly altered microspherules have a chemical composition with <30% SiO2, 30-35% Al2O3, <0,3% MgO, 10-12% FeO, 10% CaO, <1,5% K2O, 1-2% TiO2.and (OH) > 20% A microspherule (Figure1, e) have been interpreted as a barred olivine type micrometorite [2] with olivine-like composition at the core and otrhopyroxene-like composition at the rim. Two fragment of Fe-Ni metallic meteorites (Figure 1, f) have been also recognized. Discussions and conclusions: The variety of microspherules recognized in this study reveal the potential of this type of findings in continental setting of the southern hemisphere. An important consideration is that these weathering pits were exposed from  long time (Pliocene?) assuming that the actual morphology of the region is controlled by a very faint neotectonic typical of cratonic regions. The scoriaceous type of microspherules described here are very similar to those found in the Younger Dryas layer in  the northern hemisphere [3]. More detailed studies are needed to confirm such a correlation. References: [1] Rochette et al (2008) PNAS, 107, 18206–18211, [2] Taylor, S. et al. (2000) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 35, 651-666, [3] Bunch et al. (2012) PNAS, E1903–E1912. Figure 1: Different types of microspherules; a-b) glassy cryptocrystalline vesicular type; c-d) scoriaceous altered type; e) CAT micrometeorite type; f) fragment of Fe-Ni metallic meteorite. a) b)c) d)f)e)2486.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
