2496.PDF
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF NOBLE GAS BEHAVIOR DURING ACCRETION: FIRST RESULTS OF ARGON SOLUBILITY IN MAFIC LIQUIDS AT HIGH PRESSURE.  C. R. M. Jackson1, N. R. Bennett1, Y. Fei1 1Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institute of Science, Washington, DC, USA.   Introduction:  Noble gases provide a record of the earliest processes operating within Earth. Indeed, 129Xe that was produced by short-lived 129I (lifetime ~80 Ma) is heterogeneously distributed within Earth’s interior [1,2], with high 3He/4He mantle sources containing a deficit of 129Xe (low 129Xe/130Xe) compared to the depleted mantle.  This heterogeneity in 129Xe requires the early formation and continued preservation of geochemical reservoirs with variable I/Xe. Similarly, the 3He/22Ne ratio is ~3× lower in high 3He/4He mantle sources compared to the depleted mantle. Considering the negligible extent of He and Ne recycling and their extreme incompatibility during melting [3,4], this is also plausibly a relict signature of Earth’s accretion [5]. To interpret these early-formed chemical signatures, experimental solubility and partitioning data are required for the phases that formed during Earth’s accretion, e.g. metallic liquids, bridgmanite, and silicate liquids at high pressure.  These data will allow for the prediction of elemental fractionations (parent-daughter, inter-noble gas) associated with early-operating processes, i.e. magma oceans and core segregation.  Silicate liquids are a ubiquitous component in early fractionation processes, and consequently, we initially focus on noble gas solubility in liquids at high pressure. Previous studies of noble gas solubility in highpressure silicate liquids centered on the behavior of Ar [6-8].  One important observation from these studies is that there is a sharp drop in Ar solubility (~10× or greater) at relatively moderate pressures (5-15 GPa).  This drop in Ar solubility, however, has not been uniformly observed in all high-pressure studies [7, 9], raising uncertainty regarding the first order behavior of noble gases under deep mantle conditions.  Here we report the results of a diamond anvil cell (DAC) experiment where basaltic liquid was equilibrated with an Ar pressure medium. We also outline methods currently under development for a parallel series of noble gas solubility experiments to be conducted using a multi-anvil apparatus.  Our preliminary results are consistent with silicate liquids at highpressure having a reduced affinity for noble gases.  This suggests that noble gases partition more readily into phases that fractionate early from magma oceans, e.g. bridgmanite and metallic liquids, than would be predicted by low-pressure data. DAC methods:  Diamonds with 550 µm diameter culets were mounted on tungsten carbide seats in a symmetric piston-cylinder type cell.  A Re gasket was pre-indented to ~10 GPa, then machined using an EDM apparatus to create a 200 µm diameter sample chamber with a stepped profile. This design allows the sample to be positioned centrally between the culets in preparation for gas loading. The sample comprised a ~30 µm thick basaltic glass chip. The cell was filled and sealed in a 1.6 kbar Ar atmosphere and was subsequently pressurized to 13.2 GPa.  Pressure was measured using ruby florescence after gas loading.  During laser heating, XRD of the Ar pressure medium provided an independent monitor of pressure, based on the known equation of state of Ar.  Ruby and Ar pressures were consistent.  Temperature was controlled by double-sided laser heating and was monitored using the emission of the sample in the heating spot.  Temperatures were held constant at ~4600 K for 170 s before quenching. The laser-heated region was analyzed by EDS using spot, area, and mapping analyses.  With the exception of Ar, all elements were standardized against a basaltic glass with good long-term reproducibility.  The reported argon contents were determined using factory standards. The beam conditions were 15 kV and 1 nA. Six heating spots were completed.  We only report the results from the longest duration, most stable heating spot.  Analyses of the other spots are underway.  Figure 1: Map of Ar distribution local to laser heating spot.  The heating spot (area within circle) is mildly enriched in Ar relative to the background (edge of image), while the area encircling the heating spot shows higher and variable Ar concentrations   Multi-anvil methods:  We plan to run a parallel series of noble gas solubility experiments using a mul2496.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
ti-anvil apparatus.  Multi-anvil apparatus are capable of generating large volume samples with relatively low temperature gradients and stable heating, which will complement the experiments performed with the DAC.  Noble gases and starting compositions will be loaded into platinum capsules following the methods of [5].  The experiments will be run at super-liquidus temperatures and at pressures beyond those associated will the Ar solubility drop (>5 GPa for SiO2 liquids).  The effect of quench rate will also be explored by modifying the assembly design.        Results/Discussion:  Figure 2: SEM image of heating spot and surrounding glass. The heating spot is raised from unheated background. The morphology of the area encircling the heating spot is also consistent with expansion, presumably related to heat conducted from the central heating spot. Each box/point is labeled with the wt. % Ar concentration.   We were able to recover the basaltic glass chip after laser-heating to ~4600 K, significantly higher than the liquidus temperature. We have mapped the element distribution without polishing the recovered sample. Within the heating spot, Ar concentrations are relatively uniform and low, ~0.1 wt % (Figs. 1 and 2).  This concentration is low compared to other determinations of Ar solubility in mafic liquids at lower pressures (~1 wt. % Ar at 8 GPa) [10].   This result is consistent with high-pressure liquids having a lower solubility for noble gases and an increase in mineral-melt partition coefficients at magma ocean depths.   This result underlines the potential importance of early crystallizing minerals in concentrating and elementally fractionating noble gases from melts during magma ocean crystallization [11].  Further, this result suggests that the core could contain higher concentrations of noble gases than lower pressure data predict [12].  The cause of the variably elevated concentrations of Ar in the area encircling the heating spot (Figs. 1 and 2) needs to be evaluated after further sample preparation.  The pressure of the experiment (13.2 GPa) is close to the reported pressure of the reported Ar solubility drop in mafic liquids [10].  This may indicate that there is a temperature dependence on the pressure of the solubility drop or that a kinetic barrier prevented attaining equilibrium.  Further sample preparation will be conducted using a focused ion beam to minimize topographic effects on the EDS analyses and to measure element distribution on a polished cross-section.  This should clarify if major element and Ar heterogeneity are spatially correlated     Implications: There is growing evidence that high-pressure silicate melts have a reduced affinity for noble gases.  This shift in behavior will increase metallic liquid-silicate liquid and mineral-silicate liquid partition coefficients for noble gases.  The partitioning of other neutrally charged species in silicate liquids, e.g. N2 or H2, should be correspondingly affected.  Thus, knowledge regarding the mechanism of the Ar solubility drop silicate liquids and confirming its natural applicability is fundamental to understanding the acquisition and distribution of Earth’s volatile elements in general.  Future directions:  Future work will focus on expanding the high-pressure noble gas solubility database beyond Ar and to systems where the activity of a given noble gas is <1.  Developing a method where noble gas activity is <1 is essential to deriving naturally applicable fugacity-solubility relationships.  The planned large-volume multi-anvil experiments will complement the DAC series and allow for a greater diversity of analytical tools to be used in interrogating high-pressure silicate liquids. It is also critical to evaluate the effect of quenching rate on the measured noble gas solubility.           References: [1] Mukhopadhyay (2012) Nature, 486, 101-104. [2] Peto et al. (1997) EPSL, 369-370, 13-23. [3] Holland and Ballentine (2006) Nature, 441, 186-191 [4] Jackson et al. (2013) EPSL, 384, 178-187 [5] Tucker and Mukhopadhyay (2014) 393, 254-265. [6] Chamorro-Perez et al. (1996) EPSL, 145, 97-107   [7] Schmidt and Keppler (2002) EPSL, 195, 277-290. [8] Bouhifd and Jephcoat (2006) Nature, 439, 961964. [9] Niwa et al. (2012) EPSL, 363, 1-8. [10] Bouhifd et al. (2008) Chem. Geo., 256, 252-258. [11] Shcheka and Keppler (2012) Nature, 490, 531-534 [12] Bouhifd et al. (2013) Nat. Geo., 6, 982-986.  Acknowledgements: We thank John Armstrong for his assistance in the EDS analyses. Sergey Tkachev and Vitali Prakapenka are thanked for their assistance on beamline 13-ID-D at the Advanced Photon Source. 2496.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
