2498.PDF
A COMET SWALLOWS MARS: MAVEN'S MAGNETOMETER'S OBSERVATIONS DURING COMET SIDING SPRING'S CLOSEST APPROACH OF MARS.  J. R. Espley1, J. E. P. Connerney1, and G. A. DiBraccio1, 1Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771 (Jared.Espley@nasa.gov).   Summary: On Oct. 19, 2014 Comet Siding Spring's nucleus passed within 138,000 km of Mars which means the planet was temporarily enveloped by the comet's gas coma, ion tail, and dust tail. This influx of cometary material likely had numerous effects on the martian atmosphere and induced magnetosphere. The MAVEN spacecraft went into orbit about Mars about a month before this encounter. We present observations from MAVEN's magnetometer regarding the effects of the comet on the martian induced magnetosphere. Context: Ancient Mars likely had a thick atmosphere that allowed liquid water to exist on its surface, whereas modern Mars is a cold, dry place with a comparatively thin atmosphere. MAVEN is designed to investigate whether the martian atmosphere has been gradually blown away by the solar wind over billions of years. For a few hours, the comet's plasma input into the martian system likely rivaled or even eclipsed the solar wind. Thus, the comet's envelopment of Mars represents a unique opportunity to study the how the martian magnetosphere responds to in-flowing material. Results: We see several unusual signatures in the data from the time period of the cometary passage. First, the entire induced magnetosphere is compressed compared to its normal size. Second, the strength of the induced magnetic fields in the ionosphere is lower than normally expected. Finally, unusually intense wave activity is seen along the induced magnetospheric boundary. Analysis to make physical interpretations of these observartions is underway and will be presented. Interpretative Complications: However, the solar wind was unfortunately comparatively disturbed during the days just before the comet's closest approach. Therefore attributing effects exclusively due to the comet is complicated. Long term monitoring of the martian magnetosphere by MAVEN should establish which effects are expected for the disturbed solar wind alone and which can be attributed to the comet.   Figure 1: The observed magnitude of the magnetic field (B) is shown for 4 days or approximately 20 orbits. The red trace represents a model of the crustal magnetic  amplitudes for the observed locations. MAVEN's periapsis during the comet's closest approach is noticeably different than other periapses. 2498.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
