2527.PDF
A WATERLOGGED MARTIAN ENVIRONMENT: CHANNEL PATTERNS AND SEDIMENTARY ENVIRONMENTS OF THE ZEPHYRIA ALLUVIAL PLAIN.  G. G. Ori1,2 , I. Di Pietro and F. Salese1, 1   IRSPS, Universita' d'Annunzio, Viale Pindaro 42, 65127 Pescara, Italy, ggori@irsps.unich.it, 2 Ibn Battuta Centre, Universite' Cadi Ayyad, Marrakech, Morocco  Introduction:  The Aeolis/Zephyria area is a key zone for the analysis of exhumed (inverted) fluvial and deltaic channels [1]. A large number ridges and small plateaux are the product of differential Aeolian erosion that has removed a sand cover and exposed remnants of coarse channels. Regional mapping of the area reveals that the fluvial deposits extend over a large portion of the flat zone centred at about 151째 44' 47" E 3째 33' 01 S. These deposits are organised in a pattern similar to the Terrestrial continental basins with prevailing fluvial deposits and other continental sedimentary systems. A trunk river (or river systems) stretches longitudinally and alluvial fans, distributary systems and tributary rivers flows perpendicularly to the basin axis (Figure 1) [2] [3].   Figure 1 The Zephyria alluvial plain (blue lines are fluvial channels) with location of Figure 2 (left box) and Figure 3 (right box). Red dot is centred at 151째 44' 47" E 3째 33' 01" S.  The presence of a large-scale fluvial system suggests the existence of an active, extensive and longlasting hydrological cycle. Stratigraphy and setting:  The Zephyria is located at the border of the highlands and it is open into the Northern lowlands. Probably it was a large fluvial system with deltaic deposits downstream passing into the lowland body of standing water. The other sides of the basin consist of elevated plateaux consisting of volcanic basement rocks and aeolian remnants. The basin infill can be investigated in eroded windows where younger deposits can get exposed. Well-stratified deposits can be observed in the deepest part of the sequence and are overlaid by the fluvial (exhumed or inverted channels). They are interpreted as locustae deposits due to their thickness and lateral continuity. Nevertheless, another interpretation can suggest that these deposits are explosive volcanic accumulation. Sand dunes seem to be present at the base of the fluvial unit. The fluvial unit is covered by aeolian that cap the entire sequence. Internally the relationships among the different fluvial subunits are difficult to ascertain.  Meandering deposits:  Flat exhumed sedimentary bodies several km wide and elongated over 100s of km are interpreted as meander belts. The morphology of the top consists of circular ridges representing the lateral migration of the high-sinuosity channels.    Figure 2 Meander belt with well-defined high-sinuosity channels  Low-sinuosity single channels:  Single channels are among the most analysed channel pattern on Mars. In the Zephyria alluvial plain they extensively present in the southern part of the basin.       Figure 3 A low-sinuosity single channel in the southern part of the basin 2527.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  The single channels show low-sinuosity and little lateral accretion. In figure 3 the stream channel is seeing to accrete laterally instances. Both meander and straight (low-sinuosity) channels need strong cohesive banks to accrete. Low cohesive deposits such as sand or gravel are easily eroded and the river system becomes large and braided. On Earth bank cohesion is provided by mud (clay) and vegetation. On Mars mud could be the factor providing cohesion to the bank as well as ice of permafrost deposits.  Source of the rivers:  The rivers of the basin are originated in the higher deposits bordering the basin. These areas are strongly eroded and do not provide clear evidence of channels and valleys. However, the base of the slope of the highland display alluvial fans and distributary systems that strongly support that their origin is on the adjacent areas. Some meandering systems are observed to be generated by rampart craters.  Depositional systems:  An impressive set of depositional systems and channel patterns. Meandering   Figure 4 Meander belt (green and orange) to the right flowing from the eastern side of the basin they disappear (due to erosion) in correspondence of a large aeolian deposits (brown)  channels are present in large belt the south-western part of the basin and are associated to large-scale distributary systems similar to the one present in the Ebro Basin in Spain and elsewhere, including the quaternary of Sahara [4]. Distributary systems are a key point to understand the depositional setting of the flood plain and unchannaled alluvial deposits. They can be totally continental in origin or can be associated with bodies of standing water. In the latter cases, most water bodies are shallow in depth and the rivers tend to meander with small channels in the distal position mimicking the channel levee complexes of the turbidity deep-sea systems [4] Alluvial fans (Figure 5) are present in the western side of the basin. They are formed by con-shaped bodies that seem to display streams. They are probably stream-dominated alluvial fans that pass directly into rivers. This is different from mass-flow dominated alluvial fans where the process cannot produce large systems passing into streams.   Figure 5 Marginal deposits on the western side of the basin. Alluvial fans (blue) passing into streams.  Conclusions:  The Zephyria alluvial plain displays a impressive set of depositional environments and fluvial channels patterns that suggest the presence of large amount of surface and subsurface water. The plain can be confidently defined as a waterlogged environment. Its analysis may provide clues on the water history of the planet and suggest the amount of water present on Mars.  References:  [1] Burr D. M. et al.. (2010) JGR, 115, E07. [2] Cannarsa F. and Ori G. G. (2011) LPS LXII, 2169. [3] Di Biase R. A. (2013) JGR, 118, 1285 - 1302. [4] Ori G. G. (2007) In Sedimentary processes, environments and basins: a tribute to Peter Friend.  2527.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
