2529.PDF
THE MARTIAN HOT OXYGEN CORONA: FIRST RESULTS FROM MAVEN IUVS.  J. Deighan1, M. S. Chaffin1, J-Y. Chaufray2, A. I. Stewart1, N. M. Schneider1, W. E. McClintock1, J. T. Clarke3, G. M. Holsclaw1, and B. M. Jakosky1, 1LASP, University of Colorado (1234 Innovation Dr., Boulder, CO 80303, USA, justin.deighan@lasp.colorado.edu), 2LATMOS/CNRS (Université Pierre et Marie Curie, boîte 102, 75005 Paris, France), 3Center for Space Physics, Boston University, Boston MA USA   Introduction:  The planet Mars currently maintains a very thin, cold, and dry CO2 atmosphere. However, the surface displays abundant chemical and morphological evidence that a thicker, warmer atmosphere capable of supporting liquid water for extended periods of time was present in the distant past. In order to understand the removal of this atmosphere over the history of the Solar System, the loss mechanisms active at the current epoch must first be well characterized. One of the most important atmospheric loss mechanisms from modern Mars is the non-thermal escape of atomic oxygen to space. Energized by photochemical reactions in the upper atmosphere, a fraction of this socalled “hot” oxygen population can achieve escape velocity, while the remainder forms a gravitationally bound corona around the planet. Observing the hot oxygen corona is challenging due to its tenuous nature [1–3]. The MAVEN (Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN) mission is specifically designed to study the upper atmosphere of Mars and active mechanisms of loss to space. Its IUVS (Imaging UltraViolet Spectrograph) instrument [4] is the most powerful UV instrument ever deployed to Mars, and is now making regular observations of the hot oxygen corona up to a few thousand km. Here we describe these observations and present the first scientific results.  W.E. McClintock et al.Fig. 4 IUVS observation types: (a) Apoapsis imaging. The spacecraft motion carries the IUVS lines-of-sightacross the disk (upper diagram) while the scan mirror is used to make transverse swaths (lower diagram).Eight such swaths are made over 90 minutes. The angular length of the slit and the finite range to Mars atapoapsis distort the area of Mars seen in the image from the nominal hemisphere. (b) Coronal scanning. TheIUVS line-of-sight is confined to the orbit plane, with the slit parallel to the orbit normal. The look direction isthe same for both outbound and inbound orbit legs, to establish the contribution of planetary line emissions tothe light scattered by the coronal atoms. Twice during the outbound leg limb scans are performed, at differentlocations and under different conditions than those during the periapse segment. (These scans are similar tostellar occultations, not shown.) (c) Periapse limb scans. With the IUVS slit parallel to the orbit plane and tothe direction of spacecraft motion, the scan mirror is used to scan the limb over a selected range. Twelve suchscans are made during the 23-minute segment, and 21 measurements are made during each scan. For clarity,this motion is ignored in representing the individual limb scansof sight points toward the line of apsides with the slit oriented parallel to orbit normal. IUVSpoints toward the line of apsides on the outbound leg and away from the line of apsides onthe inbound leg. Subtracting the latter from the former removes the contribution to signalarising from interplanetary Lyman alpha radiation. During periapsis limb scans (C), the slitis oriented parallel to the orbit plane and to the direction of spacecraft motion. IUVS usesits scan mirror to perform limb-altitude scans approximately perpendicular to the spacecraftvelocity vector.The periapsis orbit phase spans the ∼23 minutes when the spacecraft altitude is less thanapproximately 500 km. For this period, the spacecraft orients the APP to place its i axisalong the spacecraft velocity vector to allow NGIMS to take data in the ram direction. Inthis part of the orbit IUVS rotates its scan mirror to view the atmosphere through the limbFOR, which is centered on a line in the APP j–k plane that is approximately 12° below the−k axis. Small rotations of the scan mirror project the spectrometer slit onto the limb of theplanet so that it traverses the 100–220 km altitude range of the daytime atmosphere at a rateof ∼0.1° per second. During this time the instrument detectors acquire images at a cadence  Figure 1:  Geometry of nominal IUVS coronal scans. The hot oxygen corona is measured during the outbound segment at altitudes > 500 km.              Figure 2: O 130.4 nm relative brightness profiles (arbitrary x-axis). Orbits 107–128 sample night hemisphere and contain little signal. Orbit 236 and later observe the day hemisphere where the corona is dense. Note the transition from thermal to hot oxygen at 500 km in the profile slope.     Figure 3:  Map of oxygen from the MAVEN 35 hour period orbit. The red circle indicates the surface of the planet. The sunward direction is toward the right. Note the clear transition from day to night hemisphere. 2529.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Observations:  When making nominal coronal observations on the sides of the MAVEN orbit, the IUVS line of sight is aligned with the orbital semi-minor axis. Integrations are taken every 15 seconds with tangent point altitudes ranging from approximately 300–3600 km (Fig. 1). Illumination conditions change markedly over the course of the MAVEN primary mission, with the solar zenith angle at the tangent point varying from 40° to > 90°. Example coronal profiles of the relative brightness for the O 130.4 nm emission feature are shown in Fig. 2. In addition, a unique coronal mapping observation was performed while MAVEN was in its 35 hour period insertion orbit (Fig. 3). This provided a global perspective not possible during the nominal 4.5 hour orbit. Modeling:  At the altitudes probed by IUVS, the hot O corona population is dominated by gravitationally bound atoms. Thus, a model is required to infer the escaping population and derive oxygen escape rates. A preliminary comparison of the obervations is made with a 3D Monte Carlo hot oxygen transport model [5]. Collisions with thermal CO2, N2, CO and O in the thermosphere are considered. For this initial analysis thermospheric conditions are assumed to be globally symmetric. References:  [1] Chaufray J. Y. et al. (2009) JGR, 114, E02006, [2] Feldman et al. (2011) Icarus, 214, 394–399, [3] Bhattacharyya D. et al. (2014) Mars 8th Int. Conf., #1287, [4] McClintock et al. (2014) Space Sci Rev, [5] Deighan et al. (2013) AAS, DPS meeting #45, #313.23 2529.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
