2533.PDF
GEOCHEMICAL RECORD OF  OPEN-SYSTEM CHEMICAL WEATHERING AT GALE CRATER AND IMPLICATIONS FOR PALEOCLIMATES ON MARS.  S. M. McLennan1, E. Dehouck1, J. P. Grotzinger2, J. A. Hurowitz1, N. Mangold3, K. Siebach2 and the MSL Science Team, 1Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 11794-2100, USA (scott.mclennan@stonybrook.edu), 2Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, 3Université de Nantes, 4432 Nantes, France.   Introduction:  The sedimentary record examined thus far in Gale Crater provides compelling evidence for surface transport and deposition of dominantly siliciclastic sediment [1]. Stratigraphic relationships among sedimentary rocks encountered to date remain controversial, but depositional models include some combination of alluvial fan, fluvial, lacustrine and possibly aeolian sedimentation.  Depending on stratigraphic models adopted, sedimentaion may have occurred over a relativley brief time - as little as tens to hundreds of thousands of years - or may have taken  place over more than 109 years of Martian history.  A key issue in evaluating the geological history of Gale Crater is the nature of the paleoclimate and how that climate may have changed over time. On Earth, one long-recognized method for characterizing ancient climates is to evaluate the degree of chemical weathering that has affected sources of sedimentary rocks, either through mineralogical or geochemical analysis of sedimentary rocks [2-4], and it appears that such approaches are also applicable to Mars [5-7].  Chemical weathering typically involves breakdown of labile glass and igneous minerals (especially olivine, pyroxene, plagioclase), transport in solution of soluble elements, such as Ca, Na, Mg and K, and concentration of residual aluminous clays (and ferric oxides under oxidizing conditions). One way to quantify this is the Chemical Index of Alteration (CIA), which is the molar ratio 100*Al2O3/(Al2O3+CaO +Na2O+K2O) [3] and effectively measures the degree of breakdown of feldspar and glass to aluminous clay residues [3,4]. Ideally, CIA is applied only to silicate components and so is corrected for chemical constituents, which on Earth are dominated by calcite, dolomite, halite and sedimentary Ca-phosphates. The nature of chemical consituents in most Martian sediments is not well constrained and such corrections are mostly neglected, leaving the calculated CIA value as a minimum and requiring additional care in interpreting exact values [7].  Additional insight into chemical weathering comes from plotting sedimentary data on the feldspar ternary Al2O3-CaO+Na2O-K2O (A-CN-K) and, for sediments derived from mafic sources, the mafic ternary Al2O3CaO+Na2O+K2O-FeOT+MgO (A-CNK-FM) [8,9] because there is a very clear separation between where most igneous silicate minerals plot and where most secondary sedimentary silicate and oxide minerals plot. Yellowknife Bay formation:  Bulk elemental geochemistry of the Yellowknife Bay (YKB) formation, described by [7], is consistent with two provenance components, one broadly similar to average Martian crust and the other characterized by alkali elementenriched igneous rocks.  An important observation was that all sedimentary rocks have low CIA and thus exhibited no detectable evidence for chemical weathering, in spite of mineralogy indicating a profound diagenetic overprint.  Consequently, bulk geochemistry was interpreted as reflecting near closed-system alteration with little gain or loss of most elements. YKB to Pahrump Hills:  The pattern of two provenance components and low CIA, indicating absence of chemical weathering effects, continued in APXS analyses over ~8 km from YKB to Pahrump Hills, including, for example, the waypoints Darwin, Cooperstown and Kimberley. In places, potassium is very high (K2O up to >3.5%), which we interpret as a provenance effect. Some K-addition cannot be ruled out, but K-feldspars would be among the minerals least susceptible to chemical alteration in a mafic crust [6] and so we are hesitant to invoke single element specific secondary processes to explain elevated K contents for rocks otherwise showing little geochemical evidence for open-system alteration. Pahrump Hills Section:  In contrast to previously encountered sedimentary rocks, some of those at Pahrump Hills do indeed exhibit evidence for opensystem chemical alteration (Fig. 1). Pahrump sedimentary data exhibit a trend from compositions broadly similar to the Sheepbed member (but differing in detail), with low CIA, to compositions at or above the plag-K-spar and feldspar-FM joins and lower relative amounts of FeOT+MgO. As described below, interpretation of this trend likely involves chemical weathering of some of the source materials from which these sedimentary rocks were derived. Models of Chemical Alteration:  At least three (non-mutually exclusive) models may explain the  Pahrump Hills trends in Fig. 1 and these are discussed in order of increasing likelihood. One model is secondary leaching of (unweathered) sedimentary rocks by later diagenetic or hydrothermal process. In this case, the upper section would be preferentially leached, producing (Fe+Mg)-rich fluids. A second model is that (Fe+Mg)-rich cements were added to (weathered) 2533.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
sediments, preferentially affecting the lower part of the section. This must be considered a possible factor, given the cemented nature of the rocks [10]. The third model, favored here, is that the trend is a mixing line between two provenance components, one broadly similar to YKB sediments (but differing in detail) with no evidence of source rock weathering, and the second derived from a more evolved (i.e., lower FeO+MgO) source that was influenced by chemical weathering processes. Assuming terrestrial mafic weathering trends, weathering fluids are predicted to be similar to those encountered under typical terrestrial weathering conditions. The degree of weathering depends on relative proportions of end members but the CIA value is at least ~53 and could be higher if the weathered component is only a small fraction of the mixture. Discussion:  Low CIA values at YKB were interpreted to indicate some combination of rapid erosion, arid conditions and cold climates at the time of  YKB erosion and deposition. Pahrump Hills data can be intepreted to indicate that chemical weathering affected one provenance component (models 2 & 3). The degree of chemical weathering was probably modest (CIA ≥53) but nevertheless indicates a more clement climatic regime than indicated at YKB. Since only one component may have been affected, the age of weathering, and thus age of the more clement regime, cannot be constrained except to say that it pre-dates the age of sedimentation. A signature of chemical weathering in only one provenance component (model 3) would be consistent with more clement conditions at about the time of deposition if one or other of the source rocks were more distal and experiencing a slightly different climatic regime. However, the weathered provenance component could also have been recycled from an earlier time and thus inherited a more ancient chemical weathering signature [11]. Regardless of the exact interpretation of these data, the fact that sedimentary rocks within Gale Crater are preserving signatures of variable climate provides encouragement that a climate record may be obtained for the Gale Crater sedimentary record as Curiosity works its way up Aeolis Mons. References: [1] Grotzinger J.P. et al. (2014) Science, 343, doi:10.1126/science.1242777. [2] Folk, R.L. (1968) Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks (Hemphill, Austin). [3] Nesbitt H. W. & Young G. M. (1982) Nature, 299, 715-717. [4] Young G.M. & Nesbitt H.W. (1999) GSA Bull., 111, 264-274. [5] Hurowitz J.A. et al. (2006) JGR, 111, E02S19, doi:10.1029/2005 JE002515. [6] Grotzinger J.P et al. (2013) in S. J. Mackwell et al., Eds., Comparative Climatology of Terrestrial Planets (U. Ariz. Press, Tucson) 439-472. [7] McLennan S.M. et al. (2014), Science, 343, doi:10.1126/science.1244734. [8] Nesbitt H.W. (2003) in D. R. Lentz, Ed., Geol. Assoc. Canada GeoText 4, 39-51.  [9] Nesbitt H.W. & Wilson R.E. (1993) AJS, 292, 740-777. [10] Siebach K.L. et al. this conference [11] McLennan S.M. (1993) J. Geol., 101, 295-303.   Figure 1. A-CN-K and A-CNK-FM plots comparing Yellowknife Bay formation Sheepbed member (brown field) to sedimentary rocks at Pahrump Hills.  CIA scale shown beside A-CN-K diagram and legend is in stratigraphic order. Pahrump Hills form a linear trend with one end plotting at higher CIA and close to (or above) the plagioclase-Kfeldspar (A-CN-K) and feldspar-FM (A-CNK-FM) joins than do Sheepbed sedimentary rocks, consistent with at least one provenance component being characterized by open-system chemical weathering prior to deposition (see text for further discussion). 2533.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
