2543.PDF
2014 REVISION OF THE MEPAG GOALS DOCUMENT.   V. E. Hamilton1, J. Eigenbrode2, T. Hoehler3, S. Rafkin1, P. Withers4, S. Ruff5, R. A. Yingst6, D. S. S. Lim3,7, R. Whitley8, D. W. Beaty9, S. Diniega9, L. Hays9. 1Southwest Research Institute, 1050 Walnut St. #300, Boulder, CO 80302 (hamilton@boulder.swri.edu); 2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771; 3NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA 94035; 4Boston University, Boston, MA 02215; 5Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85004; 6Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ 85719; 7BAER Institute, Petaluma, CA 94043; 8NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058; 9Mars Program Office, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109.  Introduction:  Since 2001, the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group (MEPAG) has maintained a document outlining community consensus priorities for scientific goals, objectives, and investigations for the robotic and human exploration of Mars [1]. This “Goals Document” is a living document that is revised regularly (roughly every two years) in light of new results from Mars and changes in NASA’s strategic direction. The last substantive revisions occurred in 2012; new results from the Mars Science Laboratory and ongoing missions (Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, Mars Express, the Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity, and 2001 Mars Odyssey) are the primary impetus for a new cycle of revisions and re-assessment of priorities that will help guide the Mars Exploration Program (MEP) forward into the decade of the Mars-2020 mission and beyond.  Document Overview: The 2012 Goals Document is organized into a hierarchy of goals, objectives, and investigations.  Goals are not prioritized and are organized around four major areas of scientific knowledge, informally referred to as “Life”, “Climate”, “Geology”, and “Preparation for Human Exploration”.  Objectives are major strategies and/or milestones that are needed to achieve each goal, and are listed in priority order based on a need to proceed in a particular sequence or because some are considered to be more important than others. Investigations are subordinate to objectives and contribute towards achieving an objective. A key aspect of the Goals Document is that it does not specify the instrumentation that may be used to conduct the investigations, leaving that aspect open to the selection of missions or instruments proposed through competitive processes.   Process for Revising the Document: The Goals document is maintained by the only standing committee of the MEPAG: the Goals Committee. This committee reports to the MEPAG Executive Committee and comprises a chairperson and two representatives for each Goal area (see below), who are are rotating members of the scientific community. The committee is supported by members of the Mars Program Office at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.  The Eighth International Conference on Mars, held at Caltech in July 2014, represented a major summary of many aspects of Mars science, and led the MEPAG Executive Committee to charge the Goals committee with undertaking a new cycle of revisions to the Goals document. Although this conference was the impetus for this activity, science results (and outstanding questions) from other conferences, workshops, and the literature have been taken into consideration. Beginning in October 2014, the committee met via telecon numerous times as a group or in Goal-specific sub-groups to discuss proposed changes to the structure of each Goal area and the priorities of objectives and investigations within the Goals. In addition, these telecons were supplemented by extensive e-mail exchanges. As of this writing (early January 2015) a summary of the first draft of proposed revisions will be presented to the MEPAG Chair (L. Pratt) and MEP Lead Scientist (M. Meyer) by mid-January 2015. A community comment period of several weeks will follow, and the proposed revisions will be described and discussed by the community at the next face-to-face meeting of the MEPAG in late February 2015. Comments may also be provided to any of the authors at this (LPSC) conference. Revisions will be finalized by early April of 2015, with a final document release date targeted for 1 May 2015. 2014 Revisions: Although it is premature at the time of this writing to provide details of the committee’s proposed revisions to the Goals Document (but which will be provided at this conference), there are a number of changes that can be described in general terms.  First, each goal area has undergone a deep review aimed at considering the need for revisions, additions, or deletions at all levels, including the wording of the Goals themselves. Some goals will see relatively minor changes and others will undergo substantive modifications at some or all levels; all of these are intended to clarify the intent of the various elements. Second, an outcome of the deep review was that the hierarchy will change from three to four tiers across the document: Goals, Objectives, Sub-objectives, and Investigations. The Sub-objective tier is new and includes more detail and clarity on different parts of Objectives, but covers tasks that are larger in scope than Investigations. The new hierarchy has been aided greatly by the construction of Goal-specific spreadsheets that show the traceability down through the tiers 2543.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
to the Investigation level. These spreadsheets will be included in the 2014 revision of the document to enable readers to view, at a high level, the entirety of each Goal “at a glance”. Each goal area has also developed a statement describing the prioritization rationale for that Goal; this will aid the community in understanding the considerations that went into the prioritization of Objectives, Sub-objectives, and Investigations, which are necessarily different across the goal areas. Third, the last chapter of the 2012 Goals Document, “Cross-cutting Themes”, is being re-envisioned. Crosscutting themes are being specifically defined within and between each Goal as: 1) linked or related elements within a Goal, and/or 2) linked or related elements between Goals. The purpose of this revision is to clearly document the connections and interrelationships that naturally exist in the scientific exploration of Mars (e.g., between geology and climate), but which are not captured well in the hierarchical format of the Goals Document. In particular, cross-cutting themes are intended to help members of the scientific and engineering communities identify the ways in which some investigations may shed light on (sub-)objectives other than the ones from which they are directly derived.  Finally, an Appendix has been created to both hold the material that was originally in the “Goal 1 Appendix”, and include important supplemental information for all Goals. Committee Membership: Chair: Vicky Hamilton; Goal I (Life): Jen Eigenbrode and Tori Hoehler; Goal II (Climate): Scot Rafkin and Paul Withers; Goal III (Geology): Steve Ruff and Aileen Yingst; Goal IV (Human Exploration): Darlene Lim and Ryan Whitley; Mars Program Office: David Beaty, Serina Diniega, and Lindsay Hays. Acknowledgements: The Goals Committee would like to extend its appreciation to the Integration team who summarized the state of Mars science at the Eighth International Conference on Mars [2], and who have contributed to the activities of the Goals Committee:  Phil Christensen (Geology), Marcello Coradini (Preparation for Human Exploration), Dave Des Marais (Life), and Rich Zurek (Climate). References: [1] MEPAG (2014) Mars Scientific Goals, Objectives, Investigations, and Priorities: 2012, 52 p., http://mepag.nasa.gov/reports.cfm -- older Goals document versions are also available here, and the new draft will be posted at this site.   [2] Synthesis Presentation, from the concluding session at the Eighth International Conference on Mars (2014) http://www.hou.usra.edu/meetings/8thmars2014/presentations/   2543.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
