 Sublimation of CO2 ice with H2O ice contamination: analogy with the sublimation of Mars seasonal caps S.Philippe1, B. Schmitt1, P. Beck1, O. Brissaud1, 1IPAG, Université Grenoble Alpes / CNRS, Grenoble, France, sylvain.philippe@obs.ujf-grenoble.fr   Introduction : Every martian winter, atmospheric CO2 condenses onto the surface at high latitude and forms seasonal deposits which contains small fractions of H2O ice and dust. During spring, this intricate mixture sublimates and is characterized by the disappearance of the CO2 ice spectral signature and the increase of the H2O ice one. This phenomenon is not yet fully understood and can be explained by two different processes. The first one is the accumulation on the surface of the seasonal cap of a layer composed of water ice grains that were contained in the volume of the deposits, deposited synchroneously by atmospheric precipitation [1]. The other possibility is a water frost layer  composed of tiny grains of water ice because of the 'cold traping' process provided by CO2 ice [2,3]. The  mechanism actually acting on Mars could be determined  through the grain size of the water ice, as the one formed by direct frost condensation is likely to be really tiny as observed on the Viking landing site [4,5].  So far, all the microphysical processes that govern water segregation and/or recondensation onto CO2 ice have not been experimentally tested. We propose here an experimental method that gives us clue on these phenomena using the Carbo-NIR environmental cell that has been developed to reproduce martian conditions.  Experimental Setup and Protocol  Martian Simulation Chamber. Carbo-NIR is an experimental setup that allows us to reproduce various  microphysical processes of martian ices, and especially here the sublimation of CO2:H2O ice intimate mixtures, under martian conditions (typically 150 K and 6 mbar of CO2 gas), Fig. 1. Pressure and temperature are fully controlled in the cell during all the experiment. The sunlight radiation is simulated with an halogen lamp.    Fig. 1 : Illustration of the Carbo-NIR cell Sample preparation. Pure CO2 snow  is produced from decompression of liquid CO2 using a commercial device (SnowPack). Water is introduced into CO2 ice with a regular spray. The quantity of water injected with CO2 is calibrated and we can thus choose to reproduce martian proportions between H2O ice and CO2 ice as  determined previously by modeling OMEGA / Mars Express spectra , i.e. typically 0.04 weight % of H2O [1]. The mixture is homogenized by manual mixing to avoid spatial segregation and then pourred into the cell.   Reflectance measurements. All spectra were measured at the Institut de Planétologie et d'Astrophysique de Grenoble with a spectro-gonio-radiometer [6]. This bidirectional reflectance spectrometer works in the range 0.4−4.8 µm. Spectra were acquired from 1.0 to 4.0 µm using: incidence angle = 0°, emission angle = 15°, spectral sampling of 0.01 µm. Spectralon® and Infragold® (Labsphere Inc.) were used as references. Corrections were applied to take into account the standards spectral behavior.  Sublimation cycles. The sample is subjected to  sublimating conditions during 30 minutes (illumination of the sample surface) before a new spectrum is acquired. This sequence is repeated until the complete disappearence of CO2 ice. During each sequence of illumination, the CO2 gas produced by sublimation is slowly pumped to mimic the constant pressure and the infinite reservoir that Mars's atmosphere represent for the seasonal deposits, and to avoid its recondensation at the slightly coldest bottom of the cell.   Data Analysis and Preliminary Results : The spectral measurements acquired during the experiment are presented in Fig. 2. The spectral bands caracteristic of CO2 ice gradually disappear and the H2O ice ones  become more visible. The albedo of the sample decreases slightly at the beginning, and in a faster way as the ice disappear from the bottom of the cell reavealing the black paint covering the bottom.      Grain sizes and composition. The modeling of the reflectance spectra are realized with a radiative transfert model in layered surfaces [7]. These modelisations allow us to determine  the grain sizes, composition and possible stratification of the sample at different steps of the experiment. Globally, to reproduce the measured  spectra obtained, we have to consider 2 different grain size ranges for water ice : 10-20 µm and 0.5-1.5 µm. We explain the second range to be diagnostic of a small condensation of atmospheric water onto CO2 ice during its exposition to air just prior closing the cell. The CO2 ice as a typical grain size of 200-300 µm. In Fig. 3, the first spectrum of the experiment is represented along with the best synthetic spectrum, chosen among a synthetic spectral library, generated with our radiative transfer model, with a least square calculation method. We reproduce the original mixture with a simple intimate mixture (i.e. at grain level) between the three poles described above (CO2 ice with the 2 sizes of water ices in volume) with the following proportions : CO2 (240 µm) = 99.85%, H2O (0.7 µm) = 0.04%, H2O (15 µm) = 0.11%.   Fig.2- Reflectance spectra for 24 sublimation steps, from green (original mixture) to purple (almost pure H2O ice).  Scenario of evolution : As the surface is illuminated, CO2 ice disappears easily by sublimation while H2O ice has a too low vapor pressure at 150 K to be sublimated. This leads to an accumulation on the surface of the water ice released by the sublimating CO2 ice. This process is witnessedin our spectra by the enhancement of the H2O ice band depths and the correlated weakening of the CO2 ice spectral caracteristics, progressively hidden by the water ice layer.. The addition of an upper pure H2O ice layer in our modelings  is required to fully reproduce the observed spectra. Close to the end of the experiment, all the granular CO2 ice is removed from the cell but some CO2 accumulated at the bottom due to its metamorphosis into a compact slab created by the slight cold sink  near the cryocooler connection.   The water ice stay as a thin layer above it. We propose that the same evolution occurs on the martian seasonal deposits, namely: 1 - accumulation of water ice in volume of the CO2 seasonal deposits due to atmospheric precipitation in winter; 2 - sublimation of the seasonal deposits during spring and progressive accumulation of water ice as a layer on top of it; 3 -almost continuous covering of the CO2 ice by a thick H2O ice layer (several 100 µm) that leads to the disappearance of CO2 ice spectral properties at high latitudes [1].  - -   Fig.3- Reflectance spectrum of the initial sample (black, to)  with its best synthetic spectrum (red).  Summary and Open questions : We are able to qualitatively reproduce the evolution of the seasonal deposits in terms of spectroscopic evolution. This demonstrates that water ice in volume should be the source for the water accumulating at the surface of the seasonal deposits.   However one open question is : which process(es) can lead to the large  size  of water ice grains as measured with OMEGA inside the CO2 ice layer and then at its surface? Atmospheric water ice precipitation should lead to typical grain sizes of 10 µm which is more than one order less than what we observe (~ 300 µm). Metamorphism could lead to such an increase  of grain size but is unlikely to occur in contact with CO2 ice because of the very slow kinetics at the CO2 ice temperature (150 K).  Acknowledgments: This research is developed thanks to CNES and CNRS (PNP) funds.   References: [1] Appéré T. et al. (2011) JGR, 116. [2] Houben H. et al.  (1997) JGR, 102, 9069 - 9083. [3] Bass D. & Paige D. (2000) Icarus, 144, 397 - 409. [4] Svitek T. & Murray B. (1990) JGR, 95, 1495 - 1510. [5] Hart H. & Jakosky M. (1986) Icarus, 66, 134 - 142. [6] Brissaud O. et al. (2004) Apl.Opt., 43, 19261937. [7] Douté S. & Schmitt B. (1998) JGR, 103, 31.367 - 31.389.  