2571.PDF
MORPHOLOGIES OF FRESH CRATERS, LUNAR ANALOGS, AND THE SIMPLE- COMPLEX TRANSITION ON VESTA.  G. Y Kramer1, P. Schenk1, and the Dawn Team; 1Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX.Introduction: Dawn mapping [1] of Vesta has providedour first close look at impact crater formation processeson the previously unexplored largest asteroids/ dwarfplanets. Mapping of the largest previously visited asteroids (e.g., Lutetia) revealed only simple craters [2], andVesta is the first silicate-rich body examined that is significantly smaller than the Moon yet is expected to belarge enough to have complex craters. Vesta is heavily cratered [3]. The morphology ofcraters of all classes and erosion states was examinedby [4], but in this report we describe the shapes andmorphologies of pristine craters on Vesta and the Moon.This serves three objectives: (1) examine the questionof whether complex craters actually formed on Vestaand establish a reference shape of intact craters for determining the degree of erosion, mantling, and/or relaxation of older craters; and (2) determine the simple-tocomplex crater transition in relatively fresh, unmodifiedcraters to compare with prediction and other terrestrialbodies (the simple-to-complex transition on Vesta ispredicted to be ~60-70 km [5, 6]); (3) advance our understanding of the factors that control crater formationand morphology. We consider comparison to lunarcraters of a similar size, and comparison to lunar cratersof a scaled size (where size is scaled according to inverse gravity scaling [5]).Impact crater morphologies on Vesta are determinedfrom the global Framing Camera (FC) mosaic of Vestaat 20 meter resolution (except north of 55°N latitudewhere resolution is 65 meters). Shapes are determinedusing topographic data mapped at 65 m resolution fromFC stereo imaging [7].Crater Morphology:  While ancient craters as large as250 km have been identified on Vesta [3,7], the globaleffects of ejecta produced from the two large impactbasins at the south pole, Rheasilvia and Veneneia (D505 and 395 km, respectively), have effectively mantled most impact craters formed prior to Rheasilvia withdebris up to several kilometers [8]. Since the researchobjectives require focus on craters unmodified by erosion or mantling, our work is restricted to those cratersformed after the basin. Rheasilvia itself is estimated atroughly 1 Gyr in age [3,7], which is relatively young,and as a result, large intact, unmantled post-basin complex craters are relatively few. The largest such crater,Marcia, is only 65 by 72 km in size (Fig. 1), approximately the predicted diameter of the simple-to-complextransition on Vesta.Simple Craters:  Impact craters on Vesta smaller than~30 km have a classic simple crater morphology, notradically dissimilar from lunar craters (Fig. 1). Suchcraters have a bowl or inverted-cone profile shape highlighted by a sharply defined roughly circular rim scarpwith outcrops of possible bedrock along the innerrimwall and lobate debris slides extending from the rimFig. 1: Simple-complex transition diameters for planets and moons (from Pike, 1980; Schenk et al., 2004; White et al., 2013) showing possible inverse gravity-transition correlation. Note offset points for silicate and icy compositions. Two interpretations are possible: (a) transition diameters are only moderately correlated with surface gravity, and (b) transition diameters are inversely correlated with surface gravity.Fig. 2: Comparison of lunar and vestan craters. Vestan craters on right, lunar analogues on right. For each of the 3 vestan craters a lunar crater of similar scaled size and similar absolute size are shown.2571.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
down to the bottom of the crater. Simple craters havedepth/diameters that may be ~15% deeper than lunarequivalents (Fig. 2). Rim heights may be 30% higheron Vesta compared to lunar craters, pending reevaluation of the lunar crater data (Fig. 3).Transitional Craters:  Rheasilvia is the only well-preserved impact crater on Vesta larger than 30 km(Veneneia being obscured or obliterated by the laterRheasilvia), and exhibits a fully expressed complexcrater morphology. Rheasilvia is broadly bowl-shapedand has a prominent modified-conical central uplift andisolated slump features along the inner rim crest [8].Rheasilvia does not have a lunar analogue.Intact craters larger than ~30 km have unusual floormorphologies that are neither simple not complex, atleast by lunar standards. These craters are broadlybowl-shapes with steep inner rimwalls and debris slidesbut most have a rounded but distinctly noncircularshape. They also have either broad flat floors or largearcuate to irregular mounds covering a broad craterfloor (Fig. 1). Marcia is broadly flat floored but also hasa small central mound or massif that may be a putativecentral peak, but otherwise classical conical centralpeaks are not developed or preserved in any Vestacraters other than Rheasilvia. All such craters are alsosignificantly shallower than similar-sized simple craters(Fig. 3). Although classical central peaks and floor terraces are not well developed, these landforms are regarded as transition craters - transitional from simple tocomplex morphology. Similar landforms are observedin transitional craters on the Moon (e.g., Ryder, Dawes,Girodano Bruno).Accepting the transitional crater d/D curve (and theassociated large basin d/D measurements) as the onlypreserved segment of the complex crater curve onVesta, we can estimate the transition diameter Dtr forVesta from the intersection of this with the well-definedsimple crater d/D curve (Fig. 3). This intercept or inflection occurs at Dtr ≈ 28 km, roughly half that predicted from simple extrapolation of the measured Dtr ofthe Moon and other silicate planets (Fig. 2). Discussion:  At face value, the new Dtr trend for silicatetargets when Vesta is included is Dtr ≈ D-0.7, indicating aweaker but still significant dependence on complexcrater formation on surface gravity (Fig 3).One interpretation of Figure 3 is that we are seeingthe combined influence of gravity and strength on cratercollapse and complex crater initiation. (The role of impact velocity remains indeterminate. It is also possiblethat even 60-km craters on Vesta formed in the strengthrather than the gravity regime.) Thus the g-Dtr relationship may remain valid for all bodies but that strength isvery important (as evidenced by the different ice androck trends in Fig. 3) and that Vesta and the icy satellites of Saturn all have significantly weaker crustalstrengths than their larger cousins; why is unclear.Two hypotheses are considered to explain the differences in crater morphologies observed on Vesta compared to the Moon: 1. The original transient cavity dimensions are better preserved on Vesta because oflower surface gravity relative to the Moon. In this case,the amount of rim slumping is reduced in Vestancraters, resulting in less diameter enlargement and lessshallowing. There is less overburden stresses, rim failure, and the modification process is less substantial.This hypothesis is consistent with the relatively reducedamount of floor debris and flat floor deposits.2. The lower g affects the rim uplift processdifferently on Vesta. An example would be anenhanced degree material injected into the subsurface (cf. [10]). This process could work inconcert with Hypothesis 1.Acknowledgements:  The author thanks the Dawn at VestaParticipating Scientist program.References:  [1] Russell, C., et al., Science, 336, 684-687(2012). [2] Vincent, J.-B., PSS, 66, 79-86 (2012). [3]Marchi, S., et al., PSS, 66, 87-95 (2012). [4] Vincent, J.-B.,et al., LPSC 43rd, #1415 (2012). [5] Pike, R., Proc. 11thLPSC, 2159-2189 (1980). [6] Schenk, P., et al., in Jupiter,p. 427 (2004). [7] Jaumann, R., et al., Science, 336, 688691 (2012). [8] Schenk, P., et al., Science, 336, 693-695(2012). [9] White, O. et al., Icarus 223, 699-709 (2013).[10] Sharpton, JGR, 119  (2014).Fig. 2: Depth/Diameter curve for fresh intact craters on Vesta. Closed dots are simple craters, open dots are transitional craters and crosses are older basins. Lunar curve inblack is shown for comparison. Note that older and larger basins fit along an extrapolation of the fresh transitional crater population.Fig. 3: Simple-complex transition diameters for planets and moons (from Pike, 1980; Schenk et al., 2004; White et al., 2013) showing possible inverse gravity- transition correlation. Note offset points for silicate and icy compositions. Two interpretations are possible: (a) transition diameters are only moderately correlated with surface gravity, and (b) transition diameters are inversely correlated with surface gravity.2571.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
