2585.PDF
PRESERVATION OF COMETARY AND ASTEROIDAL VOLATILES IN IMPACT MELT: AN OVERLOOKED RESERVOIR FOR HOLLOW FORMATION ON MERCURY.  R. S. Harris1, P. H. Schultz2, M. Bruck Syal3, 1Fernbank Science Center, Atlanta, GA 30307 (gageologist@gmail.com),2 Department of Geological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912,3Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94551.   Introduction: Investigators are approaching consensus that the enigmatic hollows (Fig. 1) observed by MESSENGER in and around some Mercurian craters result from the relatively recent, perhaps ongoing,  release of volatiles from within the impact melts associated with each structure [1,2]. The identities and origins of those volatiles, however, remain a mystery.   Some work [2-5] suggests that immiscible sulfides residing in the melts, especially CaS and MgS, might decompose during daytime heating or be released by interactions with the solar wind [1]. Although the absence of direct evidence for either the process or those species in the melts may be a matter of instrumentation [4, 5], such hypotheses do not account for some fundamental aspects of the occurrence and distribution of hollows. If impact melting of calcium, magnesium, and sulfur-rich crust commonly produces unstable sulfides, similar to the troilite and pyrrhotite that are ubiquitous in impact melts formed from more iron-rich crust, then why do we not observe hollows at all Mercurian craters? And as the distribution of those sulfides should be random in each melt, why are hollows concentrated in particular areas, most commonly along annular regions of crater floors or walls, and even along ray-like lineaments within proximal fall-out ejecta? Many hollows exhibit distributions reminiscent of the dissemination of meteoritic contamination experimentally predicted and observed in the ejecta and melt sheets of some impact structures [e.g., 6, 7]. But what volatile component of common bolides could survive impact and be sequestered for later release? We propose a simple answer: Water.       The Fate of Water in Impacts: The hypothesis that frequent collisions between Mercury and comets, or volatile-bearing asteroids, might give rise to abundant water vapor capable of freezing in the polar shadows now seems uncontroversial and can be modeled [8]. Nevertheless, the potential role of water in the formation of hollows seems to have been ignored. This follows the typical trend to assume that the ultra-high temperature and pressure conditions responsible for the production of impact melts precludes the survival of all but trivial water concentrations. Yet most impact melts on Earth contain a few percent water by weight, as a combination of dissolved hydroxyls and molecular species. And, as previously reported [e.g., 9-11], melts produced by natural and experimental hypervelocity collisions into porous targets can trap substantial concentrations of water. Moreover, melts produced by natural impacts into wet regolith can contain abundant hydrous inclusions (Fig. 2), with OH + H2O concentration ranging between approximately 5 and 20 wt%, embedded within nominally anhydrous glassy breccias.        Figure 1. MESSENGER narrow-angle MDIS images (Johns Hopkins University/Applied Physics Laboratory) of (A) Warhol, a complex crater, and (B) a fresh simple crater on Mercury. High-albedo hollows have developed in particular areas on the floor and walls of some complex craters while they appear to have formed in the ejecta field of the smaller structure. We suggest that the occurrences reflect the distribution of impactor-derived water in the melt ejecta.  2585.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  Figure 2. Backscattered electron micrograph showing a section of natural impact melt breccia formed at transient temperatures > 1700ºC and pressures >10 GPa. The dark, ropy regions are alumino-silicate melt glass containing between 10 and 20 wt% water. The water remains dissolved in the melt until the breccia is heated or fractured extensively.      Experiments at the NASA Ames Vertical Gun Range show that water can be trapped in melts produced from collisions in which dense, dry metal and glass impactors hit wet, porous sediments as well as those in which water-ice impactors hit dry, porous targets. The preservation of some hydrous melt inclusions also occurs when a hydrous mineral-bearing impactor (serpentinite) was impacted into a dry, porous target.  The capacity of silicate impact melts to dissolve and retain large concentrations of water generally requires two conditions. First, the water solubility in the given melt composition must be high. This is not a problem for alumino-silicate melts under pressures in excess of a few GPa. Solubilities in static highpressure melts formed between 1 to 3 GPa can exceed 20 wt% [12], and actually can increase with increasing temperature [13]. Second, the quench rates should be rapid enough to not allow equilibration with the ambient environment after the pressure drops. After solidification, the hydrous glass is remarkably resilient but likely will devolatilize upon heating or fracturing.      Implications for Hollow Formation: Waterrich melt ejecta produced during impacts between Mercury and hydrous asteroids or icy comets should be expected to contain trapped water. Large and frequent water-rich bodies might produce copious volumes of hydrous melt across the planet. Where these ejecta are distributed in proximal and distal fall-out ejecta, they may begin to devolatilize relatively rapidly when exposed to solar heating, (and perhaps space weathering processes). Volatile loss from the glasses should alter the volume, grain size, and mineralogy of the ejecta deposits.  Hydrous melts that remain inside the crater may coat crater walls, cover the surface of melts sheets, and mix in a layered stratigraphy with melt sheets. The distribution depends on the velocity, size, and angle of each event, in addition to the mechanical properties of the target and bolide.  We are examining the conditions under which hydrous melts may persist in large melt pools and the residence times of volatiles in cold quenched ejecta layered within the pools.  The trapped water may leak out as vapor over lengthy intervals of time, subsequently contributing to the shadowed cold traps adding to the volume of ice found there.  We propose that hollows reflect water trapped within melts from lower speed melts, thereby accounting for the absence of hollows in all craters. Water derived from cometary and hydrous asteroids cannot be ignored when considering the volatile history of impact melt deposits on Mercury or any other body.   Moreover, this process at basin scales (although not necessarily cometary) may play a role in trapping water at depth. Alternatively, some hollows may result from excavation of water-bearing materials in the mantle, which likewise were derived from sequestered hydrous melts formed during early large basin forming impacts. Such processes may be important in the formation of all the terrestrial planets and the Moon.   References: [1] Thomas R. J. et al. (2014) Icarus, 229, 221-235. [2] Blewett D. T. et al. (2013) JGR, 118, 1013-1032. [3] Blewett D. T. et al. (2011) Science, 333, 1856-1859. [4] Vaughan W. M. et al. (2012) LPS, 43, 1187. [5] Helbert et al. (2013) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 369-370, 233-238. [6] Van der Bogart C. H. and Schultz P. H. (2002) LPS, 33, 1719. [7] Palme H. et al. (1979) Proc. Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf., 10th, 24652492. [8] Bruck Syal M. and Schultz P. H. (2015) LPS, 46, (this volume). [9] Harris R. S. and Schultz P. H. (2005) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci. 40, A63. [10] Harris R. S. et al. (2007) LPI Contr. No. 1360, 8051. [11] Harris R. S. and Schultz P. H. (2011) LPI Contr. No. 1621, 22. [12] Bureau H. and Keppler H. (1999) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 165, 187-196. [13] Paillat O. et al. (1992) Contr. Miner. Petrol., 112, 490-500.       2585.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
