2614.PDF
UPDATING THE KUIPER BELT LUMINOSITY FUNCTION WITH THE HST SEARCH FOR A NEW HORIZONS POST-PLUTO TARGET.  A. H. Parker1, M. Buie1, J. Spencer1, W. Fraser5, S. B. Porter1, H. Weaver2, S. A. Stern1, S. Benecchi3, A. M. Zangari1, A. Verbiscer4, S. Gwyn5, J-M. Petit6, R. Sterner2, D. Borncamp7, K. Noll8, J. J. Kavelaars5, D. Tholen9, K. N. Singer1, M. Showalter10, C. Fuentes11, G. Bernstein12, R. P. Binzel13, M. Belton14 1Southwest Research Institute (aparker@boulder.swri.edu), 2Johns Hopkins/APL, 3Planetary Science Inst., 4U. Virginia, 5Herzberg Inst. of Astrophysics, 6Obs. De Besancon, 7Space Telescope Science Inst., 8NASA/GSFC, 9U. Hawaii, 10SETI, 11Northern Arizona U., 12U. Penn., 13MIT, 14Retired   Introduction:  The luminosity function of Kuiper Belt objects (KBOs) is known to break from a steep power-law for bright objects to a shallower power-law for faint objects [1,2,3]. This holds across all wellsampled Kuiper Belt populations, though the location of the break and the slopes of the bright- and faint-object power laws vary between them. Currently, the most complete assay of the properties of these luminosity functions was compiled by [4]. The faint-object slopes remained relatively poorly constrained, largely because of the scarcity of existing surveys sensitive to the relevant luminosity regime. This is frustrating, given that these faint-object slopes encode invaluable information about the growth and any subsequent collisional evolution of KBO populations [eg., 5]. The Hubble Space Telescope search for a New Horizons post-Pluto Kuiper Belt target completed in the late summer of 2014. This survey achieved one of the faintest limits of any survey for trans-Neptunian objects ever conducted (R~27.5), and covered a relatively large solid angle (0.17 square degrees). Its sensitivity, areal coverage, photometric precision, and relatively precise orbital characterization make it useful for updating the faint-object slopes for TNOs. This survey discovered five new cold classical Kuiper Belt Objects (CCKBOs) fainter than Hr ~ 10, nearly tripling the sample size of known KBOs in this regime. Here we present our preliminary characterization of the CCKBO luminosity function as updated by our survey. Search and Preliminary Characterization:  The survey was conducted between June and September 2014 (see abstract by Spencer). As the motion of KBOs in the target search field was substantial over that period, we designed the survey pattern to follow the average motion of targetable KBOs across that sky. This reduced the shear between "adjacent" fields for objects moving on CCKBO-like orbits, regardless of whether or not the actual (α, δ) of the fields were overlapping or broadly separated. This ensures that, for CCKBOs, each survey field was largely unique in its coverage, and the effective area of the survey was very nearly equal to the product of the number of survey fields and the WFC3 FOV. Multiple images obtained across a single HST visibility window were stacked using a blind predictive "synthetic tracking" approach, similar to [6]: in software, star-subtracted images were shifted relative to the stars to remove the motion of a posited moving object, stacked, and then searched for point sources.  Any real object moving at this rate will have its flux coherently combined in the stack, and its signal to noise ratio increased. In order to search over the orbital phase space of an entire population of objects, a grid of shift rates must be defined a priori. We utilized the rate selection algorithms from [7] to select a rate grid optimized for detecting CCKBOs. This decision was made because the cold classical Kuiper Belt was the most likely host of a New Horizons-targetable KBO, and it reduced our search volume by a factor of >3 compared to searching for both hot and cold objects (see Fig. 1). Fig. 1: Examples of the rate grids generated by Parker & Kavelaars (2010) algorithm [7] for cold classical and hot classical orbits. Black points: synthetic KBOs drawn from orbital PDF of population. Red points: nominal guiding orbits. Cyan circles: regions recovered with < 1 pixel of shear by each guiding orbit. Offsets are shown for time from initial to final exposures in a particular field. The larger phase space occupied by hot classical KBOs requires a much larger number of rates to search.2614.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
During the 40-orbit pilot program, select fields were implanted with synthetic point sources moving as CCKBOs would. These synthetic moving targets were blindly recovered by our detection pipelines, and we used these recoveries to measure survey sensitivity as a function of apparent magnitude. The search was found to be nearly complete to an apparent magnitude of R~27.5, with a relatively sharp cutoff. Model:  We adopt the same luminosity function  model as used by [4]; a broken power-law in absolute magnitude (H) space. The differential surface density of KBOs is parameterized by a normalization magnitude H0, a break magnitude HB, a bright object slope α1, and a faint object slope α2. Instead of modeling all existing surveys again, we simply propagate forward the posterior PDF of the model parameters for the "cold" population as determined by [4] as the prior distribution for the parameters used to model our HST detections. We drew a discrete sample of 10,000 model parameter sets from the posterior PDF of the [4] "cold" model with the emcee sampler [8]. In order to convert the survey sensitivity from apparent magnitude into absolute magnitude for a given population, a radial profile for the population must be assumed. For the CCKBOs, we adopt the CFEPS L7 model [9] of the Kuiper Belt's structure to generate a radial profile and perform the apparent to absolute magnitude sensitivity conversion. Four of the five discoveries were targeted for followup with HST, and have arcs long enough that their distance at discovery is known extremely well. The fifth object was ruled non-targetable immediately, and was not followed beyond the discovery arc. Despite this lack of followup, the astrometric precision from HST provides a measure of its distance at discovery accurate to ±0.15 AU. Thus, the distance term in the definition of H is not a substantial source of uncertainty (≲ 0.06 mag). Results: The new detections are largely in agreement with the luminosity function determined by [4]. With the addition of the five new CCKBOs, the broken power-law luminosity function model prefers a slightly shallower faint-object slope than before (see Fig. 2). The upper limit on the faint-object slope is decreased the most dramatically, and given the current state of survey characterization, this upper limit appears to be incompatible with a strengthless collisional equilibrium slope of α2 = 0.5 at high confidence. References: [1] Bernstein, G. et al. (2004) AJ 128, 1364-1390. [2] Fraser, W. et al. (2008) Icarus 195, 827-843. [3] Fuentes, C. et al. (2009) ApJ 696, 91-95. [4] Fraser, W. et al. (2014) ApJ 782, 100. [5] Kenyon, S. & Bromley, B. AJ 128, 1916-1926. [6] Gladman, B. & Kavelaars, JJ. (1997) A&A 317, L35-L38. [7] Parker, A. & Kavelaars, JJ. (2010) PASP 122, 549-559. [8] Foreman-Mackey, D. et al. (2013) PASP 125, 306-312. [9] Petit, J.-M. et al. (2011) AJ 142, 131.Fig. 2: Cumulative CCKBO luminosity function from [4] (black; median, dashed 95% confidence region) and after updating with 5 new detections from HST (red). Square point shows cumulative surface density detected by HST brighter than survey limit.2614.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
