2624.PDF
ARGUS: A CONCEPT STUDY FOR AN IO OBSERVER MISSION FROM THE 2014 NASA/JPL PLANETARY SCIENCE SUMMER SCHOOL. E. C. Marcucci1, L. Hays2,3, C. Holstein-Rathlou4, J. T. Keane5, P. Becerra5, K. Basu6, B. Davis7, V. Fox8, J. Herman9, A. Hughes10, E. Mendez Ramos7, A. Nelessen7, M. Neveu11, N. Parrish9, A. Scheinberg12, J. S. Wrobel13. 1University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK, USA (ecmarcucci@alaska.edu); 2NASA HQ / ORAU, Washington, DC, USA; 3JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA; 4Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 5University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; 6Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA; 7Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA; 8Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA; 9University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA; 10Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA; 11Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; 12Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA; 13JW Research & Design, LLC., Boulder, CO, USA.   Introduction: Jupiter's moon Io is the ideal target to study extreme tidal heating and volcanism, two major processes that shape the formation and evolution of planetary bodies. The 2011 Planetary Decadal Survey [1] identified an Io Observer as a high-priority New Frontiers class mission for the 2013-2022 decade. Responding to the 2009 New Frontiers Announcement of Opportunity, we propose a mission concept for such an Io observer mission, named Argus (after the mythical watchman of Io) (Fig. 1). This concept mission was developed by the students of the August 2014 session of NASA's Planetary Science Summer School (PSSS), together with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's Team X.   Figure 1. Argus mission logo  Key Themes: The Argus concept mission was designed around 4 key themes. (1) Tidal heating may extend the habitable zone for planets and satellites. (2) Active lava flows on Io resemble early, ultramafic volcanism on Earth. (3) Io's active volcanism creates a wealth of interaction with Jupiter and its magnetosphere system. (4) Better knowledge of Io's composition improves our understanding of planetary accretion and solar system formation as a whole.  Instruments: To address these themes, a suite of seven instruments was designed.  IGNITERS: Io Global Nighttime Temperatures Radiometer - Millimeter radiometer and spectrometer (a la Rosetta MIRO) that measures surface heat flow and plume/atmospheric chemistry. IGLOO: Io Global Optical Observer - NUV-NIR camera for regional color imaging (a la Galileo SSI), and providing insight into Ionian volcanism, tectonics, and surface properties. IoLA: Io Laser Altimeter - High precision laser altimeter, optimized for fast flybys, that measures global shape and local topographic features, revealing geophysical processes. IoNIS: Io Near-Infrared Spectrometer - NIR spectrometer (a la Cassini VIMS) for mapping mineral composition patterns that reflect geological processes that shape the surface. IoFLEX: Io Field Line Experiment - Magnetometer (a la MAVEN MAG) for measuring currents arising from Io's magma and constraining models of the Io dynamo and upper mantle circulation. IoPEX: Io Plasma Experiment - Measures the Io plasma torus dynamics to help discriminate between above/below-surface sources of magnetic fluctuations. A final science experiment possible from the highgain antenna is IRAGE: Io RAdio Gravity Experiment, which determines the internal mass structure of Io, and looks at the effects of tides. The observation strategy (Fig. 2) was designed to maximize data collection to address our science goals and test key hypotheses chosen to interrogate the Io environment.   Figure 2. Argus observational strategy   2624.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
   Figure 3. Spacecraft designed to fit into the nose of an Atlas 421 rocket. Solar power was chosen over MMRTGs.  Mission Design: Argus would be launched on an Atlas 421 rocket (Fig. 3) and use three planetary gravity assists (Venus, Earth, Earth) to reach Io. In an inclined (i = 31°), eccentric Jovian orbit (Fig. 4), Argus would make 10 flybys of Io with a closest approach of 100 km. Flybys take place between 7:30-19:30 local time, covering 100-260°W (anti-Jovian hemisphere) (Fig. 5) with a velocity of 13 km/s.    Figure 4. Argus' orbit about Jupiter.   Figure 5. Ground tracks will cover the anti-Jovian hemisphere and a variety of Io true anomalies.  Key Challenges: During this design concept, we were faced with two main challenges: (1) the intense radiation environment around Io and (2) a trade between solar and Multi-Mission Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator (MMRTG) power sources. Io orbits through the Jupiter plasma torus, the harshest radiation environment around any planet. Therefore, instruments and the spacecraft need to have mitigation strategies, similar to other missions - Galileo, Juno, and Europa Clipper. To mitigate this risk, we implemented a 500 mil aluminum radiation vault for the electronic components, spot shielding for other components outside the vault, and additional cost allocation for radiation hardening of instruments. Additionally, the high inclination orbit 31° orbit (Fig. 4) balances radiation exposure with science objectives.  The August PSSS session specifically examined power systems. Solar panels have a lower cost and mass, but are sensitive to radiation. Solar panels also dictates an instrument platform because of Sun- vs. Iopointing requirements, and introduce instrument pointing problems, due to panel flexure. MMRTGs have a steady power output and waste heat can be repurposed, although they are significantly more expensive and higher mass. After comparing these two options, solar panels where chosen as they reduced cost by a factor of four. Cost & Schedule: Following the 2009 New Frontiers Announcement of Opportunity, the mission was designed to fit under a cost cap of FY15$ 1 billion, with an additional $46 million for the use of a midrange launch vehicle (Atlas 421). The mission cost is $867 million for the development phases A through D (5 years) and $143 million for the operation phases E and F (6.5-year cruise + 2.5 years at Jupiter), for a total of FY15$ 1.01 billion. Final Thoughts: The Argus Io Observer Concept Mission was designed during the August 2014 session of the JPL Planetary Science Summer School. Tidal heating and strong volcanism are prime processes for shaping planet evolution. Study of these processes is best done at Io. Acknowledgements: We thank the organizers of the JPL PSSS for making it possible for us to carry out this concept study, in particular Charles Budney, Karl Mitchell, Leslie Lowes, Jessica Parker, as well as Bill Smythe and many JPL scientists and engineers who contributed their insight to this study. References: [1] NRC (2011) Vision & Voyages for Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022. NA Press.   2624.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
