 USE OF THE MARS ODYSSEY HIGH PURITY GERMANIUM (HPGe) GAMMA RAY DETECTOR DESIGN FOR ORBITAL ASTEROID MEASUREMENTS.  A. M. Parsons1, W. V. Boynton2, L. G. Evans1,3, D. Hamara2, K. Harshman2, L. F. Lim1, and  R. D. Starr1,4, 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 691, Greenbelt, MD 20771, Ann.M.Parsons@nasa.gov, 2University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, 3Computer Sciences Corporation, Lanham, MD 20706, 4Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064.  Introduction: High Purity Germanium (HPGe) gamma ray spectrometers [1, 2] have successfully mapped the surface and near-subsurface bulk elemental compositions of Mars and Mercury.  The powerful technique represented by these heritage instruments can also be applied to determine the surface and near-subsurface bulk elemental compositions of carbonaceous asteroids and other small bodies.   Unlike visible/near infrared (VNIR) or X-ray spectroscopy, detected gamma rays and neutrons are produced ~30-50 cm (depending on regolith density) below the surface of a planetary body, thus allowing orbital measurements significantly deeper than the optically active layer.  On Mars this was critical to the discovery from orbit by the Mars Odyssey Gamma Ray Spectrometer (GRS) of extensive high-latitude subsurface ice deposits underneath a centimeters-thick desiccated surface layer.  Similarly, on asteroids the optically active layers may be devolatilized or otherwise altered by thermal or other space weathering processes. Gamma ray measurements are thus complementary to VNIR and X-ray observations and can be made using remote sensing instruments from a Dawn-like low altitude (altitude ~ radius) orbit above an asteroid. Various gamma ray detector technologies are available.  Here we focus on the capabilities of the HPGe detectors due to their unparalleled energy resolution and sensitivity. High heritage designs exist  based on the successful Mars Odyssey [1] and MESSENGER [2] instruments. Reuse of the Mars Odyssey GRS Design: The Mars Odyssey GRS was launched in 2001 and demonstrated excellent performance while in Mars orbit for seven years. The detector achieved an energy resolution of 4.1 keV FWHM at 1332 keV at Mars and was successfully annealed multiple times. Figure 1 is an illustration of the Mars Odyssey GRS sensor head. Although the Odyssey GRS was launched in 2001, its design and flight spare hardware have been carefully curated at the University of Arizona.  With almost all of the design and electronics layout drawings still currently available, a rebuild of the Odyssey GRS is a practical option. A build-to-print philosophy is realistic in this case because the original engineering team that designed, built, and tested the GRS is still intact at the University of Arizona. A complete flight spare GRS has also been kept in a class 10,000 clean room since launch and, along with accompanying ground support equipment, is available for use in validating the new electronics. The flight spare passive cooler is also available for reuse. Figure 2 is a photograph of the Odyssey GRS flight spare and Figure 3 is a photograph  Figure 1. Mars Odyssey GRS Sensor Head  Figure 2. The flight spare GRS from Mars Odyssey has been stored in a Class 10,000 clean room since its flight qualification.  of the bench checkout equipment available for use in testing a future copy of the Odyssey GRS. We will present further evidence that the reuse of the Odyssey GRS for a new asteroid mission is practical and lowrisk.  Basis of the Technique: Galactic Cosmic Ray (GCR) protons interact with the asteroid surface materials to produce high-energy neutrons within the topmost few meters. These neutrons subsequently interact with the atomic nuclei of the asteroid materials to produce characteristic gamma rays at energies specific to the nuclei involved. A GRS must measure the energy of these gamma rays with sufficient precision to identify all of the elements present. The abundance of each element is determined by the count rates in specific energy peaks in the GRS spectra. Gamma ray spectroscopy can determine the complete subsurface elemental composition of an asteroid including elements such as H, C, O, Na, Si, S, Cl, K, Ca, Fe, Th, and U. Measurements  of H, Cl, C, S, Si and O will be particularly valuable for determining the volatile and organic content of these asteroids and coarse mapping of their subsurface distribution.  HPGe semiconductor gamma ray spectrometers provide the best available energy resolution for measurements in the 0.2 - 10 MeV energy range. Their low bandgap energy (0.7 eV), however, requires detector operation at cryogenic (75 - 90 K) temperatures so that noise from current due to thermal excitation of charge carriers doesn't swamp the signal. The GRS to be presented is a direct copy of the Mars Odyssey (MO) GRS and is a cylindrical, coaxial (6.7 cm diameter, 6.7 cm long) HPGe detector operated at 85 K. This operating temperature is reached via a high-heritage passive cooler that has achieved cryogenic temperatures without any moving parts or power requirements. This two-stage radiative passive cooler surrounds the HPGe detector and is shown in the illustration of the GRS sensor head in Figure 1. The volume increase of the Mars Odyssey GRS over the 5 cm by 5 cm cylindrical GRS aboard MESSENGER results in a significant increase in gamma ray sensitivity, making the Mars Odyssey GRS the largest and most sensitive HPGe detector ever flown on a planetary mission. Using the Monte Carlo N-Particle eXtended (MCNPX) radiation transport code [3], we have estimated the science performance of a MO GRS-like HPGe experiment in orbit around asteroids with model compositions corresponding to those of carbonaceous chondritic meteorites at levels of hydration ranging from CI-like (~17 wt% structural water) to CO-like (<2 wt% structural water). The details and results of these simulations are provided in a companion abstract, #1681 by L. F. Lim et al.  Conclusions:  We will show that a copy of the Mars Odyssey GRS can be produced at low risk and would be a valuable probe of the elemental composition of carbonaceous asteroids.  Leveraging NASA's investment in this high heritage, high performing instrument would yield unprecedented asteroid gamma ray data to help us make the connection between asteroid types and our large collection of meteorite samples found on the Earth.  References: [1] Boynton, W. V. et al. (2004) Space Science Reviews, 110, 37-83.; [2] Goldsten, J. O. et al. (2007) Space Science Reviews, 131, 339-91.; [3] Pelowitz, D. B. ed. (2005), "MCNPX User's Manual, Version 2.5.0", Los Alamos Natl. Lab., Los Alamos, N. M., Rep. LA-UR-94-1817, 473.   Figure 3. The bench checkout equipment available at the University of Arizona contains a thermal vacuum test chamber for the operating the GRS. 