 REAVEALING THE POSSIBLE EXISTENCE OF A NEAR-SURFACE GRADIENT IN LOCAL PROPERTIES OF 67P/CHURYUMOV-GERASIMENKO NUCLEUS THROUGH CONSERT MEASUREMENTS.  V. Ciarletti1, A-C. Levasseur-Regourd1, J. Lasue2, C. Statz3, D. Plettemeier3, W. Kofman4 and A. Hérique4, 1 LATMOS/UVSQ/UMPC, Guyancourt, France (valerie.ciarletti@latmos.ipsl.fr); 2 IRAP, Toulouse, France; 3Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany; 4IPAG, Grenoble, France   Introduction:  There has been, prior to Rosetta rendez-vous, no direct evidence about the structure of cometary nuclei. Approaching their internal structure is of major importance to better understand their accretion in the early solar system and their subsequent evolution processes. The successful Rosetta mission with the recent descent and landing of Philae on the nucleus of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko (thereafter 67P/C-G) on the 12th of November 2014 has provided for the first time in-situ data of the upper most importance to this matter. With receivers and transmitters onboard both Rosetta and Philae, the CONSERT (Comet Nucleus Sounding Experiment by Radiowave Transmission) bistatic radar uses radiowaves at 90 MHz that have the ability to propagate through the nucleus between the main spacecraft and the lander [1]. CONSERT preliminary data analysis should allow us to retrieve the permittivity and, if any, to point out changes in local properties of the nucleus.  In this paper, we specifically investigate the possible existence of a local subsurface permittivity gradient over depths ranging from tens to hundreds of meters. Even if CONSERT's primary goal is to perform the tomography of the whole nucleus, the grazing angles configurations (where Rosetta is just below Philae's horizon and where the propagation mainely takes place in the near surface zone) provide the best configurations to study the effect of a potential near surface permittivity gradient beneath the lander.  Results of propagation simulations for grazing angles configurations showing the effect of such a gradient as well as preliminary comparison with experimental data collected in the same Rosetta/Philae configuration will be presented.  Nucleus model:  In order to produce simulated data, electromagnetic simulations have been carried out with simple but realistic nucleus models. Such models may be derived from previous understanding of cometary nuclei, already confirmed by the Rosetta mission for 67P/ C-G.  The shape is derived from the images of the comet taken by the Osiris camera on Rosetta spacecraft [2]. As for the permittivity model inside the nucleus, we know that at CONSERT operating frequency, the permittivity is driven by the density and porosity of the nucleus and by its composition. Various nucleus bulk densities of cometary nuclei, as computed from their estimated volume, together with a tentative evaluation of their mass through nongravitational forces, have been estimated to remain in the 100 to 800 kg m-3 range (see, e.g., [3] , [4]) Results have been validated for a couple of comets, including now 67P/C-G, whose density is estimated from preliminary Rosetta data to be in the 350 to 500 kg m-3 range. The bulk porosity of  the nucleus is thus quite high. Comets, as studied from previous flyby missions and remote spectroscopy, are composed of ices (mainly water ice) and dust particles, which consist of rockforming elements (e.g. silicates) and of C, H, O, N carbonaceous coumpounds, so-called CHONs. Preliminary results from MIRO and ROSINA experiments at 67P/C-G confirm such assumptions (see,e.g. [5]). The bulk compostion consist thus mainly of water, silicates and organic compounds. Consequently, the range of the permittivity values considered for our parametric study are those of porous and dirty water ice taken from [6] and their variation with depth is described by a permittivity change Δε that occurs over a thickness Δh below the surface. Our aim is to study by simulation the potential effect of these two parameters on the CONSERT data and to possibly constraint their values from the available CONSERT data.  Electromagnetic modeling:  A preliminary study has been performed for validation of the electromagnetic model to be used for the simulation of the CONSERT data.  The need to perform a large number of simulations for different permittivity values and gradients, required the use of fast method. Two different electromagnetic 2D methods have been compared: the first one is the accurate but time consuming pseudo spectral-time domain method and the second one is the fast but approximate differential ray tracing method. For the purpose of this comparative study, the nucleus shape was a simple disk either homogeneous or with a permittivity gradient toward the center. While small discrepancies could be noticed on the amplitudes computed and to a lesser extend on the calculated propagation delays, specific features like the existence and extension of an occultation zone (where no signal is detected) and of a zone where multipath propagation occurs were similar for both methods. Relying on this result, the ray tracing method was intensively used to  run a number of simulations for a lander located at the surface of the smaller lobe of the 67P/C-G nucleus. Fig.1 shows an example of ray tracing performed on a non homogeneous nucleous that has a permittivity value higher at depth than at the surface.  Fig. 1 : Illustration of a ray tracing result for a non homogeneous nucleus.  Results:  The 2D electromagnetic modeling of the wave propagation through the shallow subsurface at grazing angle configuration shows that a potential permittivity gradient would have a noticeable effect on the CONSERT data. In fact both parameters Δε and Δh do have an impact on the angular extent and location of the occultation and multipath zones (see Fig. 2)    Fig. 2 : Simulated propagation delays as a function of the spacecraft location for three different values of the permittivity gradient.  For each (Δε, Δh) values, the orbiter angular position corresponding to transitions between visibility, occultation and multipath zones can be identified.  Reciprocally, the knowledge on experimental data of these angular positions will allow us to obtain an estimate, if any, the permittivity gradient in the subsurface nearby the lander location.  Summary and conclusions: The preliminary results obtained on our simulated data show that the limited data volume obtained during a single fly-by at low elevation should allow the retrieval of the permittivity gradient below the surface of the comet nucleus. Whenever the exact location of Philae is available, comparison with a comprehensive sets of simulated data will provide very rapidly a first estimate of the permittivity behavior below the surface. This information will help constrain the nucleus model for more accurate 3D CONSERT data analyses.  [1] Kofman, et al., The Comet Nucleus Sounding Experiment by Radiowave Transmission (CONSERT): A Short Description of the Instrument and of the Commissioning Stages. Space Science Reviews, 128:413-432, 2007.  [2]http://blogs.esa.int/rosetta/2014/10/03/measuring -comet-67pc-g/ [3] Blum et al., The physics of protoplanetisimals dust agglomerates I. Mechanical properties and relations to primitive bodies in the solar system, Astroph. J. 652, 1768-1781, 2006  [4] Levasseur-Regourd et al., Probing the internal structure of the nuclei of comets, PSS, vol. 57, 221228, 2009   [5] Altwegg et al., 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, a Jupiter family comet with a high D/H ratio, Science 1261952, Published online 10 December 2014 2014 [6] Heggy et al. Radar properties of comets: Parametric dielectric modeling of Comet 67P/Churyumov- Gerasimenko, Icarus, vol. 221, Issue 2, 925-939, 2012  Acknowledgements:  Rosetta is an ESA Cornerstone Mission. Philae is a DLR/CNES lander. The research on the CONSERT experiment is supported by funding from the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR).  CONSERT is a bistatic radar, between the lander and the orbiter, dedicated to the tomography of the deep interior of the comet nucleus. CONSERT was designed and built by a consortium led by IPAG UJF/CNRS (France), in collaboration with LATMOS (France) and MPS Gottingen (Germany).    Visibility Occultation 