2699.PDF
ENCELADUS AND ORIGIN OF THE LIFE IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM. L. Czechowski1 , 1University of Warsaw, Faculty of Physics, Institute of Geophysics, ul. Pasteura 7, 02-093 Warszawa, Poland, lczech@op.pl . Introduction: Enceladus is a medium sized icy satellite (MIS) of Saturn. MIS are built of mixtures of rocksand ices. Enceladus with its radius of 250 km is one ofthe smallest of MIS, however, contrary to the rest ofthem, it is geologically active. According to [1]: “For life to have emerged […] onthe  early  Earth,  a  sustained  source  of  chemicallytransducible energy was essential. The serpentinizationprocess is emerging as an increasingly likely source ofthat energy. Serpentinization of ultramafic crust wouldhave continuously supplied hydrogen, methane, […] tooff-ridge alkaline hydrothermal springs that interfacedwith the metal-rich carbonic Hadean Ocean” (see also[2]). We consider here conditions for origin of life in theearly Enceladus and possible proliferation of the life.   Mass of serpentinite: The serpentinization on theEarth is often considered with hydrothermal activity inneovolcanic  zones  along mid-oceanic  spreading  centers.  The total  length of  present  spreading centers  is~80 000 km. However, only in small part of them thehydrothermal activity really occurs. Even if in Hadeanoceans the hydrothermal activity was more widespread,still only small part of terrestrial rocks could be serpentinized.       After  [3]  we consider the following reaction ofserpentinization: Mg2SiO4 (forsterite) + MgSiO3 (enstatite) + 2H2O -->Mg3Si2O5(OH)4 (antigorite).       This reaction releases 241 000 J per kg of serpentine produced. A simple calculations (e.g. [4]) indicatethat  mass  fraction  of  silicates fmas in  Enceladus  is~0.646, hence the total mass of its silicate is ~6.97 1019kg.   [4] considered the process of differentiation and coreforming in Enceladus. He found that the result of differentiation is a relatively cold core of loosely packedgrains with water between them. At that time, there isnot mechanism of removing the water. Since terrestrial rocks are permeable up to the pressure of ~300 MPa then the entire  core of Enceladuswas probably  permeable  for  liquids  and  gases.  Thiscould lead to formation of extensive hydrothermal convective systems. Note that in Enceladus most of silicatecould be  serpentinized (contrary to the Earth). It indicates that total mass of serpentinized silicate in Enceladus could be larger than on the Earth. T-p conditions in Enceladus:  The pressure in thecenter of Enceladus is ~2.3 107 Pa that correspond topressure on the depth 2300 m in the terrestrial ocean.The evolution of temperature in the Enceladus interior for the first a few hundreds Myr is considered by[4]   (no  tidal  heating is  included).  If  Enceladus  accreted later than 2.4 Myr after formation of CAI thenthe temperature allows for existing the life even in thecenter of the satellite.  It is possible that for hundredsof Myr the conditions in the interior of Enceladus weremore favorable for origin of life than on the Earth [5,6]. Proliferation of life:  We do not know the probability of life origin. The life could be a common phenomenon originating in relatively short time if conditions are favorable. However, it is possible also that thelife had originated only one time in the Universe. If thisoption is true then  the  transport of  primitive organismis critical.  Fig. 1  The cryo-volcanic activity of Enceladus couldbe responsible for transport  of living organisms fromthe core to E-ring. Image presents jets in the southernhemisphere of Enceladus.  Processed picture taken byCassini (on Nov. 27th, 2005) – NASA.From the core to the surface. The volcanic activity offers occasion to transport organisms from the core tothe surface of early Enceladus. The form of this activitycould be essentially the same as present – Fig. 1. 2699.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
From the surface to E-ring. The existence of E-ring isan evidence that cryo-volcanic jets could eject gas andsolid particles (possibly with primitive organism) intoorbit around Saturn. From E-ring to an orbit around Sun.  The mechanismof gravity assist could be responsible for accelerationof some particles from the orbit around the Saturn intoorbit around the Sun. The existence of several satellitesof Saturn increases the probability of this mechanism.The sequence of close encounters with these satellitescould eventually transfer enough energy to the grains toleave the orbit around Saturn. From orbit of Saturn to terrestrial planets. To reachthe terrestrial planets from the orbit close to Saturn thegrain must be substantially decelerated. There are a fewpossible  mechanisms  of  loosing  energy:  PoyntingRobertson  mechanism (for  grains  larger  than  a  fewμm), Yarkovsky diurnal effect (if the grain is a retrograde  rotator)  and  Yarkovsky  seasonal  effect  (forgrains of diameter of a few meters); e.g. [7]. Deceleration leads the particle to move closer to the Earth andother terrestrial planets.    After [6] we consider here the Poynting-Robertsoneffect which is effective for the grains size of E-ringparticles. Assume the grain on the circular orbit of withradius R and the photons radially emitted by the Sun. Ina grain’s frame of reference the photons have some tangent component of the velocity. It gives rise to tangential  force  opposite  to  the velocity of  the grain. Thisforce is given by formula (e.g. [7]):FPR=v W/c2, (1)where v is orbital velocity of the grain, W is the powerof Sun’s radiation and c is speed of light. The power ofdrag is:Pdrag= -FPR v= v2 D/(R2 c2). (2)Note that D=CSunE Sgr (RE)2, where CSunE = 1350 W m-2 isthe Solar constant at the Earth orbit,   Sgr= π rgr2 is thecross section of the grain, rgr is the grain radius and REis the radius of the Earth’s orbit. Note also that the orbital energy of the grain is given by:Eorb = -½ G Mm/R . (3)Comparison of dEorb/dt and Pdrag and integration indicate that time of falling from the orbit with radius Ri to the orbit with radius Re is given by:t = [D/(4 mc2)](Ri2-Re2) , (4)where m is the mass of the grain. Figure 2 presents time of falling from the orbitwith the radius 9.5 AU to a given orbit as a result ofPoynting-Robertson  effect.  The  grains  density  is  assumed to be 1000 kg m-3. For the grain’s radius of 10μm the time of reaching Earth’s orbit from the Saturnian one is ~650 000 yr. Note that for large grains (e.g.~1 m) other processes, like Yarkovsky effect, could bemore effective than the Poynting-Robertson effect. Fig. 2. Time of reaching a given orbit from the orbit at9.5 AU from the Sun as a result of Poynting-Roberstson effect. The grains’ radius: 5μm (the lowest line), 10μm, 15μm, 20 μm, 25 μm (the uppermost line) After[6]. Decelaration in the upper atmosphere.  Small ratio ofmass of the considered particles to their cross sectionmakes  possible  to  decelerate  them  in  upper  atmospheres of terrestrial planets without substantial increaseof temperature – e.g. [7]. During deceleration of largerbodies the dissipation of heat could be high, but cooling effect of ablation would reduce the temperature.  Acknowledgments: This work was partially supportedby the National Science Centre (grant 2011/01/B/ST10/06653).  References:  [1] Russell,  M.  J.,  Hall,  A.  J.,  AndMartin W. (2010). Geobiology (2010), 8, 355–371. [2]Izawa  M.R.M.  et  al.  (2010).  Planet.  Space  Sci.  58,583–591. [3] Abramov, O., Mojzsis, S.J., (2011) Icarus213,  273–279. [4]  Czechowski,  L.  (2014)  Some remarks on the early evolution of Enceladus. Planet. Sp.Sc.  104,  185-199.  [5]  Czechowski,  L.  (2014).  Enceladus, a cradle of life of the Solar System. Presented inEGU 2014, Vienna. [6] Czechowski, L. (2014) Enceladus as a place of origin of the life in the Solar System. - submitted.  [7]  Pater  (de),  I,  and Lissauer J.J.,(2001).  Planetary  Sciences,  Cambridge  UniversityPress, Cambridge, UK, pp. 528. [8] Wainwright, M.,Wickramasinghe N.  Ch.,  Rose,  Ch. E.,  Baker,  A. J.,(2014).  Recovery  of  cometary  microorganisms  fromthe stratosphere.  Astrobiology & Outreach,  http://dx.doi.org/10.4172/2332-2519.1000110. 2699.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
