 THE NATURE OF HYDRATED MINERALS ON MARS: LINKING ORBITAL AND ROVER OBSERVATIONS TO CONSTRAIN THE CLIMATIC EVOLUTION OF MARS.  R. E. Milliken, Dept. Earth, Env. and Planetary Science, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912   Ralph_Milliken@brown.edu  Background:  Orbital remote sensing observations over the past decade have shown Mars to host a great diversity of hydrous minerals, including clays, sulfates, zeolites, and opaline silica [1-3]. Though certain regions of Mars contain vast exposures of these minerals (e.g., clay minerals in Mawrth Vallis and Nili Fossae and sulfates in the interior layered deposits of Valles Marineris), many of these mineral detections occur at much smaller spatial scales and are only observable at resolutions of tens to hundreds of meters. High-resolution imagery of these locations, such as that provided by the HiRISE, CTX, and MOC instruments, allows unprecedented analysis of the geomorphic setting of these minerals.  The widespread occurrence of these hydrated minerals and the diversity of settings in which they occur [1] is profound, and it is now clear that Mars records a rich and complex history of water-rock interaction that spans billions of years. Perhaps most importantly, hydrous minerals and chemical precipitates can record information about pH, salinity, and redox conditions, which in turn can provide important constraints on aqueous geochemistry and atmospheric properties. However, it is important to understand if observed mineral assemblages reflect contemporaneous heterogeneity in local conditions or if they instead record global changes through time [e.g., 4]. Though in many ways we are in a golden era of Mars exploration, important questions remain as to how orbital information can be used to understand the geologic and climatic evolution of Mars as a whole. Our geologic knowledge of Earth was (and continues to be) built piece by piece through detailed field measurements at locations across the globe, supported by laboratory analyses and modeling. Our expectations for how we will unravel the mysteries of Mars should be no different. Detailed measurements and field campaigns at select locations are necessary to place orbital-scale observations in their proper geologic context, and in this regard the Spirit, Opportunity, and Curiosity rovers have been highly successful. Orbital assessments of mineralogy and morphologly were the driving factors in the selection of the MER and MSL landing sites, and these missions provide critical in situ observations that allow us to test  hypotheses based on orbital remote sensing data. Hematite was observed in orbital TES data for Meridiani [5] and in CRISM data for Gale Crater [6], and both have been confirmed by independent in situ measurement techniques. However, the specific depositional environments in which these minerals occur could not be deteremined prior to landing because the key observations required measurements and imaging at much higher spatial resolutions than possible from orbit. We now know that the strata explored by Opportunity reflect eolian transported sediments that have interacted with acidic groundwaters [7]. Though the traverse path of Opportunity is relatively limited by terrestrial standards, the rover observations provide key tie points for understanding how to interpret orbital-scale map units (e.g., from HiRISE and MOC images). In the case of Meridiani, the hematite and associated morphologic units observed from orbit are vast, and it is likely that the processes inferred from the Opportunity measurements occurred over equally large regions. Together, the rover and orbital-scale observations suggest that this region of Mars may have been inhospitable to most life as we know it [8] when the Meridiani sandstones were emplaced and lithified. These rover-scale observations also allow speculation that other hematite and sulfate assemblages observed on Mars, such as those in Valles Marineris, may record similar processes [9]. Whether or not possible sulfate-bearing sandstones interpreted from orbital data to be present in lower Mt. Sharp in Gale Crater [10] record similar processes remains to be seen. However, if Meridiani-like deposits are observed by Curiosity over the coming months and years during the exploration of Mt. Sharp, then it may be a milestone in being able to correlate key stratigraphic units on Mars across great distances. In turn, this could imply that aqueous and associated climatic conditions inferred for Meridiani may indeed have been global in scale instead of local or regional. To date, however, observations of strata in Gale Crater by Curiosity indicate conditions conducive to clay formation in what appears to have been a habitable environment [11] that is remarkably different from previous landing sites. The fluvial-lacustrine environments observed by Curiosity are consistent with orbital observations and pre-landing hypotheses, but it is important to remember that these hypotheses could only be tested by rover-scale observations. Indeed, the orbital detection of hematite, clays, and sulfate salts in Gale [6] provide a useful roadmap for Curiosity's traverse path, but the geologic setting in which these minerals occur and whether or not those environments can be classified as habitable is not yet known. At Gale, the lowermost strata in Mt. Sharp exhibit spectral signatures of sulfates and clays, the overlying strata exhibit sulfate signatures and lack clays, and the uppermost portion of the mountain (above an unconformity) lack spectral signatures of hydrated minerals [6]. One hypothesis is that this apparent stratigraphic change in composition is the mineralogical record of water loss in the near-surface environment on Mars. That is, the strata in Gale may record the 'drying out' of  Mars as proposed by Bibring et al. [4] based on a global assessment of OMEGA observations.  The Path Forward: Curiosity's expoloration in Gale has demonstrated that diagenetic minerals have the potential to record important information about local conditions, and continued observations will help place constraints on how best to interpret orbital observations in Gale that lie beyond the traverse path. Thus, roverscale observations have a multiplicative effect in that they help us to reappraise nearby orbital data to place better constraints on conditions of habitability through a thicker stratigraphic section, and thus through geologic time. The identification of a habitable environment on Mars [11] is not a product of chance, but rather a demonstration of the synergy that is achieved through having an exploration program and strategy that relies on orbital reconassaince, rovers with diverse payloads, and support for lab experiments and modeling efforts. By continuing this approach with in situ exploration at additional key locations on Mars (Fig. 1)  we will move steadily forward in understanding the extent to which the martian rock record preserves evidence of the planet's atmospheric and climatic evolution, and ultimately the prospects for life beyond Earth. References: [1] Murchie et al. (2009), JGR, 114, E00D06; [2] Carter, J. et al. (2013), JGR, 118, 1-28; [3] Ehlmann et al. (2011), Nature, 479, 53-60; [4] Bibring, J.-P. et al. (2006), Science, 312, 400-404; [5] Christensen et al. (2000), JGR, 105, 9623-9642; [6] Milliken, R.E. et al. (2010), GRL, 37, L04201; [7] Grotzinger et al. (2005), EPSL, 240, 11-72; [8] Tosca, N. et al. (2008), Science, 320, 1204-1207; [9] Bibring, J.-P. et al. (2007), Science, 317, 1206-1210; [10] Milliken, R.E. et al. (2014), GRL, 41, 1-6. [11] Grotzinger, J. et al. (2014), Science, 343.   Figure 1. Example key stratigraphic sections on Mars that can provide a baseline for linking local rover-scale observations to global-scale orbital data. Potential variations in mineralogy through time require confirmation by in situ measurements, including i age dating, to fully understand the degree to which orbital mineral detections record global changes in the martian climate. Image is Figure 23 from Grotzinger and Milliken (2012), Sedimentary Geology of Mars, SEPM Special Publication #102, 1-48. 