2751.PDF
INVERSE THEORY FOR PLANNING GRAVITY INVESTIGATIONS OF ICY MOONS. S. Vance1,2, J. H. Roberts3, A. Ganse4, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology (MS 321-560, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA 91109, USA); 2NASA Astrobiology Institute, Icy Worlds Team; 3Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD, USA (James.Roberts@jhuapl.edu); 4Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USAIntroduction: Identifying internal structures in ocean-bearing icy worlds would constrain their thermal and compositional evolution [e.g., 1-4]. One such example that might be discovered by a future mission to Europa is a seamount, which could affect the circulation of a liquid ocean by impinging on stratified layers and possibly by acting as a focus for hydrothermal activity. We examine publicly available Europa Clipper mission study technical data [5] to address the ability of gravimetry to resolve structures in Europa’s interior, such as large-scale diapirs, brine and melt pockets and large (>10 km) seamounts. Clipper study updates have described resolution of k2 interfaces using radar [7], but much less regarding internal structures with direct ties to prospects for possible life. We use tools from geophysical inverse theory in the experimentdesign / mission-planning mode to calculate the location-dependent resolution of features in the H2O layer inferred by gravimetry. We also use forward-modeling analysis to estimate feature-size detection thresholds. Instead of estimating spherical harmonics of gravity potential, we use the extensive flyby coverage to assess at what scales possible density anomalies in an H2O layer may be resolved, superposed on a radially symmetric background model. Forward as well as the inverse analysis aims to bound the true sizes and locations of density anomalies that might be discovered in an actual Europa multiple flyby mission. Forward Problem Analysis for Single Mass Anomalies: Here we consider individual mass anomalies in order to constrain the sizes and depths of the anomalies that could be detected by the spacecraft. Standard Doppler tracking techniques are sensitive to radial variations in spacecraft velocity of order 0.1 mm/s. This corresponds to a change in the gravitational potential of 10-8 J kg, or about 10-14 times the point mass potential of Europa. In Figure 1, we show the dimensionless gravitational potential anomaly as a function of the horizontal and vertical extent of the associated mass anomaly for both a buoyant diapir in the ice shell (Figure 1a) and a seamount at the bottom of the ocean (Figure 1b). Anomalies below the limit of detectability will not perturb the spacecraft orbit strongly enough to be observed. The density contrast between the silicates and the ocean is far stronger than any potential density anomalies in the ice shell. We find that the seafloor topography dominates the longwavelength (> 200 km) gravity signature and is detectable up to 2000 km away from the surface. However, the signal from the seafloor is attenuated through the entire thickness of the ocean and ice shell, and wavelengths shorter than 40 km are not detectable even at closest approach. The short wavelength (< 100 km) gravity is thus dominated by anomalies in the ice shell. However, because of their relatively low density contrast (e.g. between clean and dirty ice, or between ice and meltwater) they are only evident within 100 km of the surface. Because the density contrasts of the expected anomalies within the ice shell are similar, it is difficult to tell what the anomaly is. A melt pocket in the ice shell may look very similar to an ice diapir, for example. It is also impossible to discriminate between the density and the thickness of the mass anomaly using the gravity alone. Figure 1. Forward problem analysis – feature detection thresholds based on expected noise. Anomalies considered here are: (a) clean ice diapir (ρci= 925 kg m-3) at 10 km depth in dirty ice matrix (ρdi = 1025 kg m-3), and (b) seafloor topography (ρs = 3420 kg m-3; ρw = 1000 kg m-3). Both sensed at 25 km altitude. The gravitational potential anomaly is relative to Europa’s point mass potential. 2751.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
  Inverse theory resolution analysis using proposed flyby trajectories: This analysis considers the inversion of a 20 km thick, laterally varying, density anomaly field as a “possible seamounts layer” above a Europan ocean bottom at 100 km, given a radially symmetric background. We use standard linear inverse theory methods for solving this linear inverse problem and calculating its resolution, as detailed in a number of textbooks [e.g., 8]. The measured data are modeled as being perfectly described by a Newtonian gravitational forward problem with additive Gaussian noise. We use publicly available proposed Clipper trajectories [5]. The continuous density anomaly field in the icy moon is parameterized by a discretization finer than the inversion can resolve. The density anomaly field and resolution kernels are calculated using Tikonovregularized linear estimation. The regularization parameter is chosen based on noise statistics using the Lcurve method [8]. Checkerboard tests (Figure 2a) use synthetic inversions to intuitively explore the resolution at which the inverse problem can “see” the actual density features. While these checkerboard tests are useful demonstrations, the resolution matrix actually quantifies the resolution limits exactly for linear inverse problems, and it can be computed without the measured data (or checkerboard data). It contains lat/lon-dependent impulse responses of the inversion (“resolution kernels”), which show how the inversion necessarily blurs the true real-world density anomalies due to ill-posedness of the inverse problem. However, since there is one resolution kernel map for every single map location, a more useful summarization shows the longitudinal width of the resolution kernels for each map location as in Figure 2b. As expected, the projection of the flyby paths is clear in that map. Summary and Discussion: Two complementary types of analysis are shown here. The forward problem analysis addresses feature-detection thresholds, and the inverse problem analysis addresses what the measurements will be able to uniquely resolve. These analyses work to bound the true sizes and locations of anomalies which could be detected in the actual mission. However, note that outside the close flyby areas, the resolution is incredibly coarse. So even though anomalies may still be detected from these regions, it is important to be aware of the stringent limitations imposed by the ill-posedness of the problem upon the ability to uniquely localize and characterize them. Acknowledgments: This work was partially supported by the Europa Clipper study. A portion of the research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract with NASA.  References: [1] Iess, L., et al. (2012) Science, 337: 457–459. [2] Iess, L., et al. (2014) Science, 344: 78–80. [3] Schubert, G., et al. (2004) Jupiter: The Planet, Satellites and Magnetosphere; p. 281–306. [4] Vance, S., et al. (2014) Plan. Space Sci., 96, 62-70. [5] Instrument Concepts for Europa Exploration, website http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/europa/iceedocs.cfm, NASA, last access 11 Dec 2014. [6] Wahr, J., et al. (2006) JGR, 111 (E12005). [7] Blankenship, D. D., et al. (2009) in Europa, Univ. of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ. [8] Aster, R.C., et al. (2005) Parameter Estimation and Inverse Problems. Elsevier Acad. Press, San Diego, CA.     Figure 2. Inverse problem analysis using the proposed Clipper trajectories – (a) Checkerboard test, a synthetic inversion demonstrating the extent of an 12x24o checkerboard anomaly pattern in a seamount layer that can be recovered by the inversion after 45 orbits. The “true” checkerboard model alternates between Δρ = 0, i.e., no perturbation from background water density of 1000 kg m-3, and Δρ = 3000 kg m-3 for perturbations from background water density to seamount density. Note the resolution of the inversion is location-dependent – as expected, more information is recovered under closest approaches of flybys. The quality of the inverted anomaly field can be expressed exactly in terms of 2D impulse responses, or “resolution kernels” of the inversion, one kernel per map location. (b) The longitudinal widths of these 2D kernels as function of map location, plotted on a single map after 45 orbits.  (a) (b) 2751.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
