 Physical and Chemical Characterization of a Selection of Lunar Impact Melt Flows. M. Alexandra Matiella Novak1, Joshua T.S. Cahill1; 1Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD.  Introduction: Melt generation is a fundamental aspect of impact processes and is influenced by a number of factors including impact velocity, impact angle, and the composition of the impactor and target materials [1; 2]. Placing proper scientific constraints on melt generation, emplacement, composition, and the ratio of crystalline silicates to impact melt glass of impact melt flows (IMFs) will provide important insights into the impact cratering process in general.  In the context of the Moon, flow-like deposits of smooth, low-albedo materials interpreted to be impact melt have been observed around young, fresh craters for quite some time [3]. These flows are thought to be mixtures of mineral clasts and melted material that are emplaced during the late stages of impact crater formation [2; 4]. Here we analyze three impact melt flows associated with cratering with visible, radar and hyperspectral data.  Our objectives for this work are to, (1) examine the physical characteristics and relationship between IMF size and the underlying topography and (2) examine the compositional diversity of the IMFs.  The three IMFs analyzed here are part of a larger study to examine a relatively comprehensive set of previously identified IMF deposits for their physical and chemical properties. Previous Impact Melt Observations: The culmination of multiple optical and radar surveys for lunar impact melt flows was recently published by [5]. Here we examine three craters within this catalogue with recently acquired ultraviolet, near-infrared and radar observations to begin developing a better understanding of lunar impact melt generation, their recrystallized/quenched constituent proportions, and their effect on flow emplacement. To test our techniques for analyzing IMFs within the [5] catalog, we will make comparisons with previous studies characterizing the physical and chemical properties of IMFs. For example, [6] analyzed several craters with M3 and DEM data to determine how the size and direction of melt flows varied with topography. Here we will examine this information in the context of Mini-RF circular polarization products. Target Craters: For this study we are focusing on peripheral IMFs from three impact craters, a crater west of Fermi, Korolev X, and Aristillus. The latter two have been examined in previous studies [5; 6], and here we aim to build upon their efforts. The crater west of Fermi Crater is ~18 km in diameter and has an associated IMF to the east of the crater about 8 km in length. The IMF is easily observed in M3 and Mini-RF data (Fig. 1). The second flow is located near a smaller crater, (diameter of 17 km) and is situated on the northern rim of the 27 km diameter crater Korolev X.  The IMF itself is 15 km in length originating from its southern rim and two small melt ponds located in the central and the southwestern part of the crater floor. These melt deposits appear as regions of slightly lower albedo than the surrounding surface [6]. In the [5] catalog, they estimate the length of the melt to be approximately 12 km from the crater rim. In either case, the melt is sufficiently large enough to observe in the data sets analyzed here.  The third crater is the 55 km diameter Aristillus Crater, which has an associated melt NE of the crater rim extending approximately 55 km [5] from the crater.  This IMF is also sufficiently large enough to observe in the selected data set. Mini-RF S-band Analysis of Melt Flows: Among the more readily apparent features in Mini-RF S-band CPR maps are the radar-bright features associated with impact structures and the presence of coherent bodies of impact melt. IMF deposits typically have CPR values up to and exceeding unity, making them relatively easy to distinguish from the background terrain [5; 7; 8]. LROC NAC Analysis: Spectral and radar analysis and interpretation will be enhanced with LROC Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) observations. The NAC consists of two monochrome line scan imagers with resolutions of 0.5 m/pixel [9]. These images will be critical for additional geologic context and high spatial resolution. We employ these data in combination with Mini-RF and M3 data to assess the physical properties of each IMF observed more readily at the surface.  For example, in the case of our focus crater, IMF west of Fermi, Fig. 2 is an LROC NAC image of the region within the IMF outlined in a black box from Fig. 1.  Within this image we can distinguish small-scale melt flow features that are difficult to identify in the M3 and Mini-RF data but are readily discerned together at a more coarse resolution as an IMF unit. Impact Melts in M3 Data:  The IMFs of these craters can also be observed in M3 data to analyze the chemical compositions of the flows.  For example, Fig. 3 is an RGB M3 image showing a bright feature within the blue channel, which corresponds to Band Depth 1900 nm, a pyroxene index. There is also a bright green feature, corresponding to the integrated band depth at 2000 nm, which is an index for Fe mineralogy.  This Fe feature is just outside the Mini-RF outline, but is still within a radar bright feature, so is still considered melt, however with slightly lower radar backscatter values and a differing composition. Future Work: Future work will include quantifying mean CPR values for melts at these three craters relative to background values.  Additionally, employing more band depth and integrated band depth  RGB color composites with the M3 data sets will help us to further discern the composition of these melts and if certain compositions can be related to physical property variations seen in the Mini-RF and LROC observations. References: [1] Grieve et al. (1977) Pergamon Press 791-814. [2] Osinski et al. (2011) Earth and Planetary Sci Letters, 310, 167-181. [3] Howard and Wilshire (1975) Jour. Research U.S.G.S. 3, 237-251. [4] Hawke and Head (1977) Pergamon Press 815-841. [5] Neish et al. (2014) Icarus 239, 105-117. [6] Wohler et al. (2014) Icarus 235, 86-122. [7] Campbell et al. (2010) Icarus 208,  565-573. [8] Carter et al. (2012) J. Geophys. Res. 117, E00H09. [9] Robinson et al. (2009) Space Sci Rev 150, 81-124.   Fig. 1 - Mini-RF  (lsz_02332_2cp_eku_16s118_v1.img) S-band CPR map of melt associated with a crater west of Fermi Crater.  The melt displays as a radar bright feature and is roughly outlined in red.  The black box outlines Fig. 2.  Fig. 2 - LROC Observation M1122822079L.img.  The outline of the melt as seen in the Mini-RF data is used to locate the areas of the flow in LROC NAC data. Red arrows point to sinuous flow features.   Fig. 3 - The melt flow outline from the Mini-RF data overlaid on top of an RGP color composite of M3 data (M3G20090530T160828, OP2C1) for the crater west of Fermi Crater. Here R=band depth at 1000nm; G=integrated band depth at 2000 nm and B=the 1900 nm channel. 