2777.PDF
Temperatures of Giordano Bruno Crater: Application of an effectivefield of view model using LRO Diviner J.-P. Williams1, E. Sefton-Nash2, and D. A.Paige1, 1Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA(jpierre@mars.ucla.edu), 2Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of London, London, UK.Introduction: The Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment aboard LRO [1] acquires calibrated radiometric measurements of reflected visible and emitted infrared radiation of the Moon in 9 spectralchannels covering a wavelength range of 0.3 to400 µm and nominally points in the nadir direction operating as a multi-spectral pushbroom mapper. Observations are acquired continuously witha 0.128 s signal integration period. We present ananalysis of gridded radiance measurements at Giordano Bruno, a 22 km diameter rayed crater, providing an example of our gridding procedure developed for creating the Diviner level 2 gridded dataproducts. Brightness temperatures and anisothermality observed in Diviner’s thermal IR channelsreveal heterogeneous thermophysical properties ofthe crater ejecta indicating minimal mechanical distruption by micrometeoroids consistent with a recent formation age.Effective Field of View (EFOV): To producemapped data products, the data needs to be binnedonto a grid. A measurement is represented by asingle location on the surface; however the total radiance that contributes to a measurement derivesfrom a finite surface area. Binning the data ontoa cylindrical latitude/longitude grid can result inaliasing at high latitudes where the areal extent ofthe bins in longitude become increasingly smallertowards the pole. This can result in unpopulatedbins that represent surface areas that contribute tothe measurements being gridded. Additionally, thefootprints of the detectors of the individual channels in general will not be identically aligned. Thismisalignment can result in artifacts in gridded dataderived from multiple channels. This can be seen inFig 1c showing Diviner channel 4 differenced withchannel 7.Issues such as these are resolved by modelingthe two-dimensional EFOV projected onto the surface for each observation using the Monte Carlomethod prior to binning the data. For an instrument operating in a pushbroom configuration likeDiviner, the EFOV may be defined by (i) the in-tracktime broadening due to spacecraft motion relativeto the target body, (ii) the detector response as afunction of time and, (iii) the instruments instantaneous field of view (IFOV) (See [2] for details).The EFOV is populated with n points and proFigure 1: Orbit 1479 brightness temperatures: (a)Channel 4, (b) channel 7, (c) channels 4-7, and (d)channels 4-7 using EFOV modeling. Dashed linesoutline the crater rim and black boxes show location of LROC subframes in Fig 2.jected onto the surface of the target body given thedetector orientation relative to North. The cloud ofpoints will trend toward the actual EFOV as n increases, with the point density reflecting the probability distribution. Modeled points are assignedthe same radiance value as the original observationand are used as input to a binning routine. Assuming a sufficiently high point density, all binsthat lie within the EFOV will be populated witha value. This eliminates the occurrence of emptybins. Where adjacent detectors have overlappingEFOVs, points from different observations may reside in the same bins. The resulting radiance valueof each bin is therefore the weighted mean of theobservations that fall within it. Diviner channelsalso become better aligned as can be seen in Fig 1dwhere speckling in the temperature difference mapis eliminated.Brightness Temperatures at Giordano Bruno:Giordano Bruno is a Copernican-age crater near theeastern limb on the lunar far side (36◦N, 103◦E). Thecrater has an extensive ray system with an age estimated to be 1 to 10 Ma based on crater counts onits ejecta [3]. Fig 1 shows Diviner channels 4 and 7data from orbit 1479 acquired at an altitude of 57.33km and binned at 1/128◦ pix−1. By modeling theEFOV during the binning process, channels 4 and 72777.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Figure 2: Area of (a) cooler morning temperatures and elevated anisothermality and (b) warmermorning temperatures and lower anisothermality.become aligned and the speckling in the brightnesstemperature difference map in Fig 1c is eliminated.The local time is 10.6 (late morning). Rocky areasare cooler in the morning as they warm slowly relative to areas free of blocky material. The mixtureof temperatures in the FOV resulting from the rocksresult in anisothermality in the Diviner channels aschannel 4, the shorter wavelength spectral band, ismore sensitive to the warm temperatures and channel 7 the cooler temperatures. The difference mapshighlight the anisothermality which corresponds tothe ejecta containing large blocks (Fig 2).At high orbit altitudes or latitudes, aliasing inthe gridded data becomes apparent. Fig 3 showsbolometric temperatures derived from all 7 IR Diviner channels for orbit 303 during the commissioning mission phase when the spacecraft was in anelliptical orbit. The spacecraft altitude was aboutthree times the altitude when in its near-circular orbit during the nominal mapping phase of the mission. As a result, the ground track is now wideenough that gaps appear in the gridded data at1/128◦ pix−1. Applying our EFOV model, thesegaps are populated with data as these regions werewithin the instruments FOV and contributed to themeasurements (Fig 3b). This data was acquired ata local time hour of 4.9, prior to sunrise in the earlymorning when lunar temperatures are near theirlowest. The warmest temperature in Figure 10b is170.9 K, compared with the typical nighttime temperatures at the equator which are ∼ 100 K in theam hours [4]. The regolith cools rapidly after thesun sets while the rocks remain warmer though thenight resulting in anisothermlity in Diviner nighttime observations. Differencing Diviner channels6 and 8 reveals areas where large rocks have remained warm through the lunar night (Fig 3c).Figure 3: Orbit 303 bolometric temperatures derived from all 7 IR channels (a) without and (b) withEFOV model and (c) Channels 6-8. Dashed linesoutline the crater rim.Discussion: The anisothermality observedaround Giordano Bruno shows that the craterand its ejecta exhibit substantial heterogeneity inthermophysical properties. The large variationsin brightness temperatures and the large blocksof material observed in LROC NAC images, areconsistent with a recent, < 10 Ma, formation ageas the breakdown of rocks and the accumulation ofregolith on the Moon is fairly rapid [5].References[1] D. A. Paige, et al. The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment. SpaceSci. Rev., 150:125–160, 2010.[2] E. Sefton-Nash, et al. Modeling, gridding, and storageof effective fields of view for terascale, point-basedplanetary datasets: case study - LRO Diviner. LPSC,45:2737, 2014.[3] T. Morota, et al. Formation age of the lunar craterGiordano Bruno. Meteor. Planet. Sci., 44:1115–1120,2009.[4] A. R. Vasavada, et al. Lunar equatorial surface temperatures and regolith properties from the DivinerLunar Radiometer Experiment. J. Geophys. Res., 117,2012. doi:10.1029/2011JE003987.[5] R. R. Ghent, et al. Constrains on the recent rate oflunar ejecta breakdown and implications for craterages. Geology, 42:1059–1062, 2014.2777.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
	Introduction:	Effective Field of View (EFOV):	Brightness Temperatures at Giordano Bruno:	Discussion: