2780.PDF
SOLAR LYMAN-ALPHA OCCULTATION MEASUREMENTS OF THE MARS HYDROGEN CORONA.  E.M.B. Thiemann1, F.G. Eparvier1, M.S. Chaffin1, J.T. Clarke2 , 1Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80303, Thiemann@lasp.colorado.edu, 2 Center for Space Physics, Boston University, Boston, MA, 02215   Introduction:  Although its primary mission is to characterize the solar Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV) input into the Mars atmosphere, the MAVEN-EUV instrument has proven sufficiently sensitive to characterize the Mars hydrogen corona from 100 km to above 6000 km via solar hydrogen Lyman-α occultation measurements.  The composition of the hydrogen corona, or exosphere, at Mars is important for understanding hydrogen escape which is related to the historic composition of H2O on the surface of Mars [1].  The hydrogen exosphere also plays a key role in the interaction between the Martian atmosphere and the solar wind; and constraining the structure of the hydrogen exosphere will lead to a better understanding of upper atmospheric processes including volatile escape and Energetic Neutral Atom (ENA) production rates [2], [3].  The hydrogen corona has already been shown to have seasonal variability [4], [5]; and transient solar events including solar flares and solar energetic proton events also drive variability through heating and ionization of the extended Martian atmosphere.  Regular occultation measurements of the hydrogen exosphere can provide the capability to characterize relative changes due to both seasonal factors and solar transients. Previous Observations:  The Martian hydrogen exosphere was first characterized by Mariner 6 and 7 fly-by missions from measurements of Lyman-α day glow emissions which showed a single population of cold hydrogen with an exospheric temperature of 350 K and a density of 3 x 104 cm-3 at 250 km [6].  It took over three decades for the hydrogen corona to be further characterized when hydrogen density profiles were retrieved independently using measurements of Lyman-α emissions from the ASPERA-3 and SPICAM instruments aboard Mars Express.  Unlike the initial Mariner results, both the ASPERA-3 and SPICAM measurements require a hot and cold population of hydrogen for measurement to agree with theory; and both techniques were subject to absolute calibration issues [7], although exospheric variability observations have proven less prone to calibration effects [5], [6].  It is apparent that the hydrogen exosphere is still poorly understood and a need for additional measurements exists. MAVEN-EUV Solar Occultations:  An occultation measurement can be made when a planetary atmosphere passes between the point of observation and an astronomical light source such as the Sun, a star or a moon. A major advantage of the occultation technique is that it is independent of absolute calibration, and the accuracy is primarily contingent on knowing the spectral passband and relative instrument sensitivity during a scan.  In the particular case of MAVEN-EUV, the Lyman-α channel can resolve relative changes in incident irradiance smaller than 0.1%, which is sufficient to resolve absorption profiles from 6000 km to 100 km tangent height.  Since hydrogen has an absorption cross-section eight orders of magnitude larger than any other species present, all of the absorption can be essentially attributed to hydrogen.  These absorption profiles can be inverted using well established techniques to retrieve density profiles, scale heights and ultimately the temperature of the hydrogen exosphere.  The primary disadvantage of solar occultation measurements is that they are inherently constrained to the terminator.  However, MAVEN-EUV also observes hydrogen absorption on the day-side which is modulated as a function of atmospheric height or vertical column density.  These measurements can also be inverted to characterize the hydrogen exosphere beyond the terminator.  We will present first results of the occultation measurements demonstrating the capability and limitations of using a sensor intended to measure the Sun to probe a planetary atmosphere.  References:  [1] Carr, M. H. (2003), JGR,108. [2] Bougher, S. W., T. E. Cravens, J. Grebowsky, and J. Luhmann (2014), Space Science Reviews. [3] Kallio, E., and S. Barabash (2001), JGR, 106, 165. [4] Chaffin, M. S., J.-Y. Chaufray, I. Stewart, F. Montmessin, N. M. Schneider, and J.-L. Bertaux (2014), GRL, 41, 314–320. [5] Clarke, J. T., J.-L. Bertaux, J.-Y. Chaufray, G. R. Gladstone, E. Quemerais, J. K. Wilson, and D. Bhattacharyya (2014), GRL, 41, 8013–8020.  [6] Anderson, D. E., and C. W. Hord (1971), JGR, 76, 6666–6673.  [7] Chaufray, J. Y., J. L. Bertaux, F. Leblanc, and E. Quémerais (2008), Icarus, 195, 598–613,    2780.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
