 CRYSTAL ORIENTATION EFFECTS FOR OXYGEN-ISOTOPE MEASUREMENTS OF CHROMITE.  C. E. Caplan1, G. R. Huss1, J. E. Hammer2, R. C. Ogliore1 and K. Nagashima, 1Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1680 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, 2 Department of Geology and Geophysics, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1680 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96822, caplance@hawaii.edu.  Introduction: Chromite (FeCr2O4) is a potential tracer of the populations of meteorites that have come to Earth over its geologic history [1]. However, in order to use oxygen isotopes to sort out this record, it is necessary to understand potential instrumental artifacts that could affect SIMS analyses. Huberty et al. [2] report a crystal-orientation fractionation effect for magnetite. Because chromite has the same crystal structure as magnetite, it may be expected to show a similar fractionation, but none has been reported [e.g., 3]. Therefore, we carried out a set of measurements to examine whether crystal orientation influences the oxygen isotopic ratios obtained by SIMS for chromite.  Experimental: We studied a cumulate chromite sample from a lower layer of the Stillwater complex on the northeastern margin of the Beartooth Mountains, Montana. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analyses confirm the grains are randomly oriented within the sample.  A polished one-inch round section of the chromite cumulate was prepared by polishing to 0.3 um alumina slurry, and then finishing with vibratory polishing with colloidal silica. The section was mapped in backscattered electron (BSE) mode using a JEOL 5900 LV scanning electron microscope, and the crystal orientations were determined by EBSD using an Oxford Instruments Nordlys detector.  Oxygen isotopes were measured using the University of Hawai'i Cameca ims 1280 ion microprobe. We used a ~2 nA Cs+ primary beam focused to ~10 μm, and a 15x15 μm2 raster. The sample was pre-sputtered for 120 second using a 2 nA beam and 25x25 μm2 raster. Secondary 16O- and 18O- ions were counted in multi-collection mode using faraday cups. The mass resolving power was set to ~2000. Each run consisted of 30 cycles of ~8 seconds each.  Because the Cs+ primary beam hits the sample at ~20° to the normal, the orientation of a crystal relative to the incident ion beam is different from that determined by EBSD, which takes as the reference plane the surface of the sample. To interpret the SIMS results in terms of crystal orientation, the orientations determined by EBSD must be rotated to the reference frame of the primary ion beam. Orientations are reported in the reference frame of a plane perpendicular to the incident primary ion beam, except as noted.   Results and Discussion: Thirty crystals with a wide range of orientations were selections for SIMS analysis. Three to five individual measurements were taken on each grain (Fig. 1). Each grain typically showed good reproducibility for the individual measurements. The typical 2 standard deviation for a grain was consistent with the measurement error at ~0.12‰. Measuring isotopic fractionation by SIMS can be very challenging. Small changes in instrument conditions can result in mass-fractionation effects that are considerably larger than our measurement errors.  Initial measurements were made without taking care to ensure constant distance between the sample surface and the immersion lens.  We corrected beam position using the X deflector. However, we found a systematic shift in 18O with position on the sample (and with X deflector setting). The procedure was modified to correct the beam position with the stage Z control (which controls sample height).  Under these conditions the total range of 18O values exhibited by the chromite decreased from 2‰ to 0.6‰.  Only data collected with a constant distance between immersion lens and sample are considered here.   Figure 2: Oxygen isotopic compositions of Stillwater chromite grains as a function of sputtering angle.   Figure 1: Secondary Electron image (SEI) of ion microprobe analysis pits in a representative Stillwater chromite grain. Each pit is ~ 25 μm.   Figure 2 shows the average δ18O value for each grain as a function of the angle between the primary ion beam and the [110] direction, which corresponds to an edge of the cubic unit cell.  The first-order observation from Figure 2 is that, although we see variations larger than our statistical uncertainties, there is no correlation between the δ18O values and the crystal orientation. In addition, any preferred orientation effects should be apparent in an inverse pole figure (Fig. 3). Figure 3 shows the crystal orientations before rotation into the ion probe coordinate system in an inverse pole figure. This inverse pole figure plot does not include the systematic rotation of crystals into the reference frame of the SIMS beam, but correction of the figure to account for rotation is not anticipated to introduce a pattern of isotopic variation. Again, there is no correlation between crystal orientation and δ18O values.    Figure 3: Inverse-pole figures demonstrating 18O before rotation into the ion probe coordinate system.  Because chromite is isometric and the three crystallographic axes are identical, all information can be shown on one such figure. As there is no clustering of d18O values on this plot, we conclude that Oxygen isotope values are uncorrelated with crystallographic orientation. Why should magnetite show significant crystal orientations effects on 18O while chromite does not?  The crystal structures of chromite and magnetite are both hexoctahedral, face-centered cubic, with very similar unit cell lengths (a = 8.344Å and a = 8.397Å, respectively). The major difference between the two minerals is the magnetic properties of magnetite that are absent in chromite.  Huberty et al. [2] considered four possible causes for variations in instrumental mass fractionation due to the properties of magnetite. Two phenomena have been proposed based on the structure of the sample: channeling of incident ions by the structure and focusing of secondary ions by the structure [4]. Channeling and focusing effects for face-centered cubic crystals are greatest when the ion beam is parallel to the set of directions <uv0>, from [110] to [100] [5]. Huberty et al. [2] report high measured 18O values when the incident beam is parallel to the preferred channeling and focusing directions for magnetite, but they do not think that these factors are the direct cause of the variation.  We do not see variations in 18O for chromite that correlate with these preferred directions, and because the structures of magnetite and chromite are the same, we agree that channeling and focusing are not causing the effects observed by [2]. Variations in electrostatic fields can also cause shifts in 18O [2].  We discussed above how differences in the distance between the sample and the immersion lens affect 18O.  This is an electrostatic effect.  Huberty et al. [2] prefer electrostatic effects as the cause for the observed variation, with emission of ions occurring preferentially in the direction of the incoming ion beam and variations in the electric field changing the portion of the ion cloud that gets into the mass spectrometer. Again, we do not see the effect, so this explanation seems unlikely.  The fourth possibility is the magnetic field of the magnetite. This is the primary difference between magnetite and chromite.  Huberty et al. [2] carried out some experiments to test this possibility and discount the magnetic field as the cause of the observed fractionations.  However, it may be that the effects of magnetic fields need to be revisited. Conclusions:  We prepared and carefully documented a sample of cumulate chromite and measured 18O in crystals with a wide range of orientations.  We found no isotopic variations that can be attributed to crystallographic orientation, in contrast to what [2] observed for magnetite.   References: [1] Schmitz B. (2013) Chem. der Erde 73, 117-145.  [2] Huberty J., Kita N. T., Kozdon R., Heck P. R., Fournelle J. H., Spicuzza M. J., Xu H. and Valley J. W. (2010) Chem. Geol. 276, 269-283. [3] Valley J. W. and Kita N. T. (2009) MAC short course: secondary ion mass spectrometry in the earth sciences, 41, 19-63. [4] Benninghoven, A., Rüdenauer, F. G., & Werner, H. W. (1987) J. Wiley. [5] Gnaser, H. (2007) Sputtering by particle bombardment (pp. 231328). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Supported by NASA grant NNX14AI19G (GRH). 