2797.PDF
INCISED VALLEY FORMATION IN RESPONSE TO SEA OR LAKE LEVEL CHANGES AT AEOLIS DORSA, MARS.  B. T. Cardenas and D. Mohrig, Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA.  Email: benjamin.cardenas@utexas.edu   Introduction:  There is evidence that a subset of fluvial deposits at Aeolis Dorsa, a basin on Mars thought to have once been near to or contain a standing body of water [1], preserve incised valleys carved and filled during changes in base level, which was likely controlled by water surface elevation of a large lake or sea.  Three low-albedo, channelized corridors, each several tens of kilometers long (Fig. 1), contain relict point bars and scooped boundaries at their bases (Fig. 2), indicating that the base and lateral extent of each corridor was defined by a migrating, net-erosional river.  Above the basal deposits are stacks several tens of meters thick of “inverted sinuous ridges” (Fig. 2), which are channel-filling deposits that have been exhumed and topographically inverted [2-4].  Indicators of avulsions, channel re-occupations, an overall flattening of basal topography, and confinement of inverted sinuous ridges to the dark corridors are evidence of the gradual filling of a valley cut by the basal migrating river.  Valley incision and fill are common responses to sea level change on Earth.  Aeolis Dorsa is currently open to the northern lowlands of Mars, where an ocean has been hypothesized to have once existed, although a large lake could have also controlled base level.  Cross-cutting valleys require at least two episodes of base level fall and rise.  The magnitudes of the base level changes are estimated at over 50 meters, based on the thickness of the valley-filling stratigraphy.  Valley incision depths commonly range from 1/3 to ½ of the total sea level fall on Earth and in experiments, so the measured deposit thicknesses agree with sea level changes suggested by other studies [5].  Meander asymmetry [6] is consistent with a southeastern paleoflow direction, a conclusion which other methods have also reached [1], and is supported by a set of branching fluvial deposits 40 km to the southeast which, qualitatively, appear to be deltaic in origin when compared to other deposits in the region interpreted as deltaic (DiBiase). Fluvial Stratigraphy:  The fluvial stratigraphy contained within each valley is consistent.  The basal deposits consist primarily of point bars left by a meandering river.  Stacked above the basal deposits are topographically-inverted channel-filling deposits which      show no signs of significant migration and likely inherited their sinuosity from lower, under-filled channels.  We believe this up-section decrease in migration to be a result of a transgression.  Migration rates, and therefore sinuosity, have recently been shown to be dependent on the availability of coarse sediment used to build point bars.  The backwater effect slows flow velocities in rivers near coastlines, which in turn limits the availability of course sediment, which then limits migration rates [7].  At Aeolis Dorsa, we are observing a decrease in migration rates up-section, implying the coastline moved closer to the study area over time.  Others have interpreted valley-filling deposits buried in Earth’s subsurface in this manner [8].  Additionally, river incision should increase sediment supply and therefore migration rates, so basal migrating channels should intuitively be common if not ubiquitous in incised valleys – determining the truth of this is a goal of future work.    Conclusions:  Deposits at Aeolis Dorsa, Mars, have been interpreted to be exhumed incised valleys, which formed during two base level changes of an ancient sea or large lake.  This conclusion is reached by two main points.  First, several generations of fluvial deposits are stacked on top of each other and are placed as though they were once confined by a valley cut by a migrating river.  Second, the sequence of stacked fluvial deposits, which change from migrating significantly at the base to no significant migration at the top of the sequence, indicating an increasing backwater effect within the valleys over time, and therefore a transgressing coastline over time. References: [1] DiBiase R. A. et al. (2013) JGR: Planets 118, 1285-1302. [2] Burr D. M. et al. (2009) Icarus 200, 52-76. [3] Burr D. M. et al. (2010) JGR 115, doi:10.1029/2009JE003496. [4] Williams R. M. E. et al. (2013) Icarus 225, 308-324.  [5] DiAchille G. and Hynek B. M. (2010) Nature Geoscience 3, 459463.  [6] Carson M. A. and Lapointe M. F. (1983) The Journal of Geology 91, 41-55.  [7] Smith V. B. (2012) Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.  [8] Armstrong C. P. (2012) Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.        2797.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Figure 1 – low-albedo corridors (black arrows) contain stacked sets of inverted sinuous ridges and are interpreted as the exhumed remnants of incised valleys.   Figure 2 – DEM demonstrating the common sequence of fluvial deposits in each corridor.  At the base are relict point bars.  Stacked above the base are several generations of topographically-inverted fluvial deposits which show no signs of significant migration. 2797.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
