 THE IMPORTANCE OF PARTICULATE TEXTURE TO THE FLOW STRENGTH OF ICE + DUST.      W. B. Durham1, N. Golding1, L. A. Stern 2, A. Pathare3, D.L. Goldsby4, and D. J. Prior5, 1Department of Earth Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wbdurham@mit.edu; ngolding@mit.edu; 2U.S. Geological Survey, Menlo Park, CA, lstern@usgs.gov; 3Planetary Science Institute, pathare@psi.edu; 4Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, dgoldsby@saa.upenn.edu; 5Department of Geology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, david.prior@otago.ac.nz.   Introduction: Preliminary experimental surveys of the flow of dilute mixtures of ice plus hard particulates under planetary conditions indicate a strengthening effect with respect to pure ice, but with dependencies on environmental conditions (temperature, stress, grain size) that vary widely from study to study [1-4]. With the expectation that the textural character of the particulate fraction (size, shape, spatial distribution of particulates; relationship of particulates to ice grain boundaries, etc.) also influences rheological behavior, we have begun a more systematic investigation of the effect of particulates on strength. We rely extensively on cryogenic scanning electron microscopy (CSEM) and to maximize planetary relevance we focus on behavior at low stress and small grain size. New sample fabrication procedure. For the past two decades we have fabricated fine-grained ice from ordinary coarse-grained ice by a so-called pressuredrop (P-drop) method whereby we raise pressure into the ice II stability field above 200 MPa and then rapidly release the pressure back to the ordinary ice I field. In the new method we freeze droplets of water that are initially very small, thereby obviating the need for tedious pressurization. Our effort was aided by improved access to electron backscatter diffraction techniques in CSEM. CSEM revealed the textural issue in the first place, and has allowed us to monitor development of textures by new mixing methods.  We now create fine water droplets (diameter 1-2 µm) using an ordinary low-cost medical nebulizer, directing the mist from the nebulizer into our cryogenic glove box. Water particles freeze immediately and the frozen fog settles at the bottom of the box at a rate of a few g/hr, where it can be collected and pressed into deformation samples (mass ~20 g), or as appropriate, mixed with hard impurities and then pressed into samples. The improvement in sample fabrication efficiency in terms of person-hours/sample of nebulization vs. P-drop is an extraordinary factor of ~ten. Because the high-pressure deformation vessel is not involved, the process is far less strenuous and avoids unnecessary wear and tear on the vessel; it also frees the vessel for other uses. Finally, CSEM analysis shows that with nebulization the mean grain size of the final product is finer, and the particle size distribution tighter than that of P-drop ice (Figure 1).  Figure 1. CSEM images of pure, dense, fine-grained ice created by the P-drop method (a and b) and by freezing nebulized water droplets (c and d). Images are generated by electron backscatter diffraction, which allows grain (and therefore grain-boundary) identification on the basis of crystallographic orientation. Pairs show the same area in band contrast mode and colored by orientation. Material created by nebulization is clearly finer grained. Image area for each panel is approximately 300 µm x 300 µm. Furthermore, the material that emerges from nebulization mixes more uniformly and reproducibly with particulates, being in a more complete state of grain disaggregation than fine-grained P-drop ice. We have fabricated and put into use an inexpensive motor driven cryogenic tumbling box for making ice + particulate mixtures. Preliminary comparison of dusty mixtures of P-drop vs. nebulized ice clearly show non-uniformity of particulate distribution at scales much greater than the ice grain size in the former (Figure 2a) and much more uniform in the latter (Figure 2b).    Figure 2. Comparison in CSEM of dust distribution in fine-grained ice mixed with 3 vol% 1.0 µm alumina powder as formed by the P-drop sample fabrication method (a), and by nebulization (b). Upper box in (a) is enlarged in inset, showing the many ice grain-ongrain boundaries within larger clusters that are in turn surrounded by alumina. In contrast, the alumina is more evenly distributed in (b). Rheological behavior of ice + dust mixtures. Figure 3 shows the effects of the two sample preparation methods for a fixed dust particle size and concentration of 1.0 µm and 3 vol%, respectively, with aluminum oxide, Al2O3, as the proxy for martian dust. The plots reveal behaviors different from that of pure fine-grained ice (solid green, red, and blue lines) and from each other. Because the textures of the two kinds of dusty ice are distinct, we can reasonably infer that dust texture matters to rheological behavior. More quantitatively, the most prominent effect in the P-drop material (Figure 3a) is the change slope of the trend lines of the data with respect to the trends for unadulterated fine-grained ice. This increased sensitivity of strain rate to stress suggests a change in deformation mechanism. Not shown in Figure 3 is the observation that dusty P-drop ice hardens with strain, whereas pure fine-grained ice and dusty nebulized ice do not.  The effect is interesting from a deformation physics point of view, but the complexity of the dust distribution in P-drop dusty ice, in particular non-uniformity at scales much greater than the ice grain size, makes it difficult to assure reproducibility in the lab, and in turn, difficult to generalize (i.e., use in extrapolation). In contrast, the texture of dusty nebulized ice is more uniform, and therefore likely to yield results useful for predicting behavior of ice in martian formations.  Figure 3. Comparison of the rheological behavior and dust distribution in fine-grained ice mixed with 3 vol% 1.0 µm alumina powder prepared by the two different methods. Solid lines without data indicate the relatively low stress sensitivity of grain size sensitive (GSS) flow typical of pure fine-grained ice. Whereas the clumped, heterogeneous nature of P-drop mixtures (a) seems to increase stress sensitivity, the homogenous mixtures based on nebulization (b) seem to retain the original stress sensitivity. References: [1] Durham, W.B. et al. (1992), JGR, 97, 20883-20897. [2 ] Goldsby, D. L. et al (2013) 44th LPSC, Abstract #2739. [3] Yasui, M. and Arakawa, M. (2008) Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L12206. [4] Yasui, M. and Arakawa, M. (2010) Icarus, 210, 956-967. 