2801.PDF
RECURRENCE RATE ESTIMATION OF DISTRIBUTED VOLCANISM IN ARSIA CALDERA, MARSJacob A. Richardson1, James A. Wilson1, Charles B. Connor1, and Jacob E. Bleacher2, 1School of Geosciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, USA (jarichardson@mail.usf.edu), 2Planetary Geodynamics Laboratory,Code 698, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA.Introduction:  Volcanism  is  a  major  feature  ofmany  planetary  surfaces,  including  the  surface  ofMars. Understanding the geologic history of Mars thusrequires understanding of rates of volcanism, and howthese rates have changed through time. Here,  we usesmall volcanic vents to constrain the recurrence rate ofvolcanism for a volcano cluster within the caldera ofArsia Mons.Over one thousand small volcanic vents have beenobserved on Mars with the help of recent image and altimetry data. From these observations, a detailed catalog has been developed of small vents in the TharsisVolcanic Province, enabling vent fields to be characterized and compared [1].  These mapped small volcanic vents have likely erupted since at least the earliest Hesperian period in some regions [2] and have continued to form in other areas to the late Amazonian, asrecent  as  several  tens  of  millions  of  years  ago  [3].These  volcanic  vents  are  often  found  in  distributedvolcano clusters and their edifice morphologies, eitheras low shields with single flow fronts or as high sloped(~6 degrees) cones [4], are indicative of “monogenetic” volcanism. Martian distributed volcanic fields arecomposed of tens to hundreds of small volcanic ventsthat each erupt lava flows, form lava flow fields, andbuild volcano edifices.  The eruptive history of  theseclusters  is  uncertain,  but  by analogy to Earth monogenetic volcanic fields, each edifice likely represents asingle eruptive episode, meaning that cumulatively thevolcanic  field  provides  a  record  of  volcanism for  along period of time.One  such  field,  Syria  Planum,  produced  263mapped volcanic  vents  over  a  time span  as  great  as700 million years,  as estimated from crater  retentionrate modeling for five geologic units in the area [2].The recurrence rate  for  the creation of new vents inthis  area  might  therefore  be  an  average  of  one  newvent every 375,000 years. However, this assumes thatthe volcano cluster at Syria was uniformly active forits entire history. A more accurate estimate of the rateof volcanism during a large, distributed magma generation can be gained by mapping stratigraphic relationships and modeling ages with crater  counts for  individual edifices in a field.Arsia Mons: An isolated volcano cluster exists inthe  caldera  of  Arsia  Mons  consisting  of  29  mappedvolcanic vents (Fig. 1). The vents cover ~6700 sq. km(70%) of the 100 km diameter caldera with associatedlava flows. Edifices constructed from lava flows havebeen outlined using images from the Context Imager(CTX) and gridded data from the Mars Orbiter LaserAltimeter (MOLA). Edifice perimeters are selected atthe edge of the farthest lava flow that can be directlytraced to its corresponding vent. Lava flows that wereemplaced in the same direction but which are coveredby more recent flows were not  assigned to a mappedvent.Stratigraphy:  Outlined lava flows abut each otherand clearly embay or are embayed by flows from othervents.  A complete table of  stratigraphic relationshipshas been created (Fig. 2) using CTX images to identifyembaying  features,  such  as  lava  infilling  craters  orgrabens that cut stratigraphically lower flows. A totalof 47 stratigraphic relationships connecting the 29 volcanic vents.  Of the 47 mapped stratigraphic relationships, 17 are redundant (i.e. other relationships indirectly link volcanic edifices stratigraphically).Fig. 1. Map of 29 volcanic edifices produced by volcanic vents in the Arsia Mons Caldera.  Edifices areoutlined in white. Vents are black dots and are labeled,corresponding to vent numbers in other figures.Crater Age-dating:  In addition to stratigraphic information,  craters  with  diameters  >60m  have  beencounted within edifice perimeters with CTX images toprovide  age  estimates.  Craterstats2  is  used  to  modelages  based  on  crater  counts  binned  by diameter  [5].2801.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Ages and uncertainty are estimated for each volcanicedifice.  Our results show that the Arsia Caldera volcano cluster was likely formed over the past 500 Ma(Fig. 3).Recurrence Rate Estimation:  We have producedan algorithm to assess the recurrence interval of volcanic events in a distributed volcanic field by estimating the range of potential ages for each mapped event.Called the Volcanic Event Recurrence Rate (VERRM)model,Fig.  2.  Mapped  stratigraphic  relationships  betweenvents are symbolized here as lines. “Redundant” linesthat have been mapped are in gray. Vent numbers thatare  higher  in  the  chart  are  stratigraphically  higherthan connected vents that are lower.the  code  accepts  stratigraphic  information  and  otherdate models, in this case crater age-dating estimates, inorder to create a recurrence rate estimate for eruptionsin an entire volcanic field. VERRM runs in a MonteCarlo fashion,  seeking to assign ages to all  volcanicevents in a consistent way that does not violate information gained from stratigraphic or age model data. Bycreating thousands of potential age models for eventsin an entire field, the uncertainty in the recurrence rateof volcanism, here defined as the rate of formation of anew mapped vent, is elucidated.VERRM  first  identifies  vents  that  have  a  highnumber of stratigraphic relationships with other vents,and  assigns  dates  to  these  vents  first,  based  onmodeled  age  results.  In  this  case  ages  are  assignedfrom crater-count derived dates using a random normaldistribution with 1σ being the standard uncertainty reported from craterstats2. The model then assigns datesto neighboring vents with their modeled ages, but onlyaccepts dates that do not violate stratigraphic information.  The ultimate output  is  a  potential  age  for  eachvolcanic event. By performing this thousands of times,the  range  of  potential  ages  for  each  volcano  ismodeled.The  potential  ages  of  volcanic  events  from  theVERRM algorithm are plotted on the right of Fig. 3.We  find  that  the  modal  recurrence  interval  of  theyoungest  20  events  is  one  event  per  ~11 Ma.  Oldervents  have  longer  intervals  between  eruptions,  possibly due to missing vents.Conclusions: Recent volcanism in the Arsia Monscaldera peaked between 100 and 200 Ma, as evidencedby crater retention rates. Stratigraphy can further constrain event dates. On Arsia Mons, vents have recentlybeen created over time at a rate of ~11 Ma.References: [1] Bleacher J. E. et al. (2009) JVGR, 185, 96-102.[2] Richardson J. A., Bleacher, J. E., and Glaze, L. S.(2013)  JVGR,  252, 1-13. [3] Hauber, E. et al. (2011)GRL,  38, L10201. [4] Brož, P. and Hauber, E. (2013)JGR-Planets,  118, 1656-1675. [5] Michael G. G. andNeukum G. (2010) EPSL, 294, 223-229.Fig 3. Age estimates for mapped Arsia Caldera vents. Left, results from age modeling using crater counts alone. Right, potential vent ages with the VERRM model, incorporating stratigraphic information to constrain craterderived ages.2801.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
