 OBSERVATIONS ON MULTIPLE MELTING PROCESSES IN A BARRED PYROXENE-OLIVINE (BPO) CHONDRULE IN LL3.00 SEMARKONA.  Bastian Baecker and Alan E. Rubin, Department of Earth, Planetary and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA.  (b.baecker@ucla.edu)  Multiple Melting of Porphyritic Chondrules. There are several lines of evidence that porphyritic chondrules have experienced multiple melting events. These include the presence of relict grains [1,2], igneous rims [3,4], and enveloping compound chondrules [5]. Wasson et al. [6] showed that multiple overgrowth layers on low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts in porphyritic pyroxene (PP) and porphyritic olivine-pyroxene (POP) chondrules were formed by several melting/cooling events. The overgrowth layers appear in back-scattered electron (BSE) images as sets of dark-to-bright zoning bands. Low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts in porphyritic chondrules have up to nine sets of dark-to-bright BSE layers [6]; each set represents a separate melting event. There are two different kinds of chondrule-melting events: (a) a primary event that caused extensive melting (perhaps 90-100%) and produced the spheroidal shapes of the chondrules due to surface tension and (b) secondary events that caused minor degrees of melting (perhaps 5-20%). Most of the secondary events melted all the high-FeO mesostasis in the boundary region immediately adjacent to the mafic silicate phenocrysts as well as varying amounts of low-FeO mesostasis slightly farther away. In more-extreme heating events, thin layers of the adjacent mafic phenocryst may also have melted. The liquid tended to become moderately well mixed during many secondary melting events.  For heating events during which most of the mesostasis was melted, the first layer to crystallize at the edge of a low-Ca pyroxene grain during cooling would be relatively rich in MgO, but poor in FeO and CaO (and thus BSE-dark). During fractional crystallization, the melt layer adjacent to the phenocryst becomes gradually more ferroan, resulting in higher FeO and CaO contents in the subsequently crystallized pyroxene overgrowth layer (which is BSE-bright). Each episode of overgrowth formation increases the size of the phenocrysts and decreases the total amount of residual mesostasis. Fractional crystallization causes the bulk FeO/MgO ratio of the residual mesostasis to increase after each melting/cooling episode. However, the last pyroxene to crystallize has higher FeO and CaO than the adjacent boundary layer of melt.  At some point CaO in the mesostasis becomes so high that Ca-pyroxene crystallizes at the edges of lowCa pyroxene phenocrysts. It appears that after Capyroxene becomes the liquidus phase, no new low-Ca pyroxene overgrowths form on the phenocrysts. Sluggish diffusion in low-Ca pyroxene [7] largely preserves overgrowth layers, even after multiple heating events. However, because Fe and Mg diffusion rates are ~40× higher in olivine [8], diffusion leveling generally causes overgrowth layers on olivine to become too subtle to be recognizable in BSE images. Melting of Typical Droplet Chondrules. There is a general consensus that ferromagnesian droplet chondrules (i.e., those with radial, barred or cryptocrystalline textures) formed by complete melting of their solid precursor assemblages during a primary melting event [e.g., 9] and avoided subsequent episodes of less extensive melting. There should be no olivine or low-Ca pyroxene overgrowth layers on the bars and laths. However, Rubin [10] provided evidence that a barred olivine (BO) chondrule in Semarkona experienced one primary and three secondary melting events. Barred Pyroxene-Olivine (BPO) Chondrule N8e. We identified another droplet chondrule that seems to have been melted multiple times. Chondrule N8e from Semarkona thin section AMNH 4128-2 is a large BPO chondrule (Fig. 1) with an apparent diameter of 2080 µm. It consists of (in vol.%) 65.4% low-Ca pyroxene, 11.1% olivine, 12.4% opaque phases (metallic Fe-Ni and sulfide), 7.1% Ca-pyroxene  and 4.0% mesostasis. In this BPO chondrule there are elongated olivine grains situated between the pyroxene laths. This is not a normal porphyritic texture; such chondrules typically consist of relatively coarse isolated phenocrysts surrounded by mesostasis [11]; they formed from incomplete melts [12]. The lath-like morphologies of the olivine and pyroxene grains in N8e indicate that they formed from a melt. Nevertheless, the quasi-hexagonal structure of the chondrule (Fig. 1) suggests that a few relict grains were present after the primary melting event. This event probably melted 98% of the chondrule precursor materials. Low-Ca pyroxene (typically Fs19Wo1.6) bars in the chondrule are 20-250 µm in size and have euhedral to elongated morphologies. The bars are separated by minor amounts of mesostasis and ~130-µm-size rounded metallic Fe-Ni and sulfide blebs. Many of the low-Ca pyroxene bars contain 1-8 vol.% rounded vugs (0.5-10 µm in diameter) (Fig. 2). Several of the low-Ca pyroxene bars in the chondrule are overgrown by two to five 5-15-µm-thick alternating BSEdark and BSE-bright layers (Fig. 2). The layers tend to be asymmetric and in many cases do not completely surround the underlying layers or the grain core. Olivine (Fa28.1) phenocrysts (~10-100 µm in apparent diameter) occur throughout the chondrule. Many olivine grains are intergrown with low-Ca pyroxene.  The feldspathic mesostasis consists mainly of clear, colorless, isotropic glass; it contains ~2 vol.% small (15 µm) rounded to elongated Ca-pyroxene crystallites. Most of the Ca-pyroxene in the chondrule occurs as ~15-µm-thick overgrowths atop the low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts at their interface with the mesostasis.  After the primary melting event, surface tension caused the N8e droplet to assume a spheroidal shape; during cooling, a few relict nuclei helped produce the overall quasi-hexagonal pattern of the mafic silicates. Initially, the bars were thin; mesostasis containing opaque blebs occurred between the bars. The bulk of the metallic Fe-Ni and troilite formed a large patch near the chondrule center during cooling (Fig. 1).    Fig. 1. Barred pyroxene-olivine chondrule N8e in Semarkona. Gray phases are olivine and pyroxene; white phases are metallic Fe-Ni and sulfide. BSE image.  Chondrule N8e experienced several less-extensive secondary melting events in which the mesostasis, metallic Fe-Ni, sulfide, and (possibly) thin layers of the mafic silicate phenocrysts were melted. The mesostasis was moderately well mixed during each melting event. During crystallization, the first overgrowth layer to form around the pyroxene bars was more magnesian than the bars (and, hence, BSE-dark). As fractional crystallization caused the melt to become more ferroan, low-Ca pyroxene with higher FeO/MgO crystallized as an overgrowth layer (a BSE-bright zone) around the low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts (Fig. 2). This process repeated until CaO in the mesostasis increased sufficiently to make Ca-pyroxene the liquidus phase.  Conclusion. Multiple melting of ferromagnesian chondrules was not restricted to typical porphyritic textural types. At least some droplet chondrules also experienced several secondary melting episodes.    Fig. 2. Low-Ca pyroxene phenocrysts in chondrule N8e in Semarkona. Several show a series of overgrowth layers; up to six numbered overlying BSE-dark and BSE-bright sets are evident. aug = augite; mes = mesostasis; px = low-Ca pyroxene; olv = olivine. BSE image.   References: [1] Nagahara H. (1981) Nature, 292, 135-136. [2] Rambaldi E. R. (1981) Nature, 293, 558561. [3] Rubin A. E. (1984) GCA, 48, 1779-1789. [4] Krot A. N. and Wasson J. T. (1995) GCA, 59, 49514966. [5] Wasson J. T. et al. (1995) GCA, 59, 18471869. [6] Wasson J. T. et al. (2014) LPS XLV, Abstract #2883. [7] Ganguly J. and Tazzoli V. (1994) Am. Mineral., 79, 930-937. [8] Dohmen R. et al. (2007) Phys. Chem. Minerals, 34, 389-407. [9] Hewins R. H. (1989) Proc. NIPR Symp. Antarct. Met., 2, 200-220. [10] Rubin A. E. (2013) MPS, 48, 445-456. [11] Gooding J. L. and Keil K. (1981) Meteoritics, 16, 17-43. [12] Lofgren G. E. (1989). GCA, 53, 461-470. 