2824.PDF
A SIMPLE FRAMEWORK TO OBSERVE AND INTERPRET THE ORIGIN OF METEORITES. R. K. Herd1,2 1Natural Resources Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0E8; 2Department of Earth Sciences, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By drive, Ottawa, Ontario Canada K1S 5B6.  herd@nrcan.gc.ca  Introduction: Meteorite components, like "witness plates", probably have recorded everything that happened to them during successive stages of planetary and solar system evolution. Considering what they are and when they probably formed can lead to consideration of how they formed, and suggest the sequential processes that have operated around them. A framework is proposed to easily systematize observations. Context:  Meteorites are rocks formed in space. They are composed of minerals with textures formed by a variety of processes. The processes are reflected in the textures, as in terrestrial rocks, except that the contextual origin of most meteorites can only be guessed. Clearly they have had complex histories. Are their origins, even within the same classification groupings, the same, or different?  Can this be discerned? Even quantified? What generalizations about cosmic processes are derived? Background:  Major data collection methods over many years have included examination of polished thin-sections using transmitted and/or reflected light, and back-scattered electron (BSE) images from scanning-electron microscopes. Hundreds of digital images have been generated[1,2]. Framework:  Meteorite components include:  Alpha (α) or α- stage: very early relict or refractory minerals such as pre-solar grains - beginning products; Beta (β) or β- stage: chondrules or CAIs which seem to have arisen by heating/melting and cooling, e.g. in a nebula, perhaps of α-stage materials, before incorporation into larger solid bodies/planetesimals;  Gamma (γ) or γ- stage: high temperature alteration assemblages such as annealed, recrystallized and equilibrated versions of the above, probably after incorporation;  Delta (δ) or δ - stage:  aqueous alteration/ weathering and replacement of higher temperature phases; Sigma (σ) or σ-stage: shock products; Omega (ω) or ω-stage: the sum total of all of the above, the section being examined - the end products. Different meteorites may have different ω values, indicating different lithologies, but show similar α - δ stages. Stage repetition may be indicated by e.g. γ1,γ2. Results:  Minerals and textures formed at each of the α - δ and σ stages in ordinary and carbonaceous chondrites have been considered. All show evidence of the first three or four stages, in the same sequence, even though the ω product is different. Conclusions:  The framework works. In these meteorites initial relict and refractory components have been incorporated into those that then experienced heating, melting and cooling, followed by annealing and equilibration, and possibly aqueous alteration, with shocked components both early and late.  These sequences reflect stages in the development of the meteorites and of the solar system of which they are a part. Comparisons with other meteorites analyzed in this way are invited. References: [1] Herd, R.K. et al. 2006. Meteoritics & Planetary Science 41: Supplement: Abstract #5362. [2] Herd, R.K. 2014. Meteoritics & Planetary Science 49: Supplement: Abstract #5416. 2824.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
