2826.PDF
STRONTIUM-IODIDE: AN ULTRA-BRIGHT SCINTILLATOR FOR PLANETARY GAMMA-RAY SPECTROSCOPY.  T. H. Prettyman1, A. Burger2, J. L. Lambert3, J. Castillo-Rogez3, N. Yamashita1, 1Planetary Science Institute (1700 East Fort Lowell, Suite 106, Tucson, AZ 85719, prettyman@psi.edu), 2Fisk University, Nashville TN, 3NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Insitute of Technology, Pasadena, CA.   Gamma ray spectroscopy (GRS) is an established method to determine the elemental composition of planetary surfaces and atmospheres [e.g. 1].   Orbital missions to planets and asteroids have included gamma ray spectrometers as primary payload instruments.   The compositional information has provided new information on a wide variety of geochemical and atmospheric processes.  We expect that GRS will be used on many future missions.   While GRS instrumentation for planetary science is mature, developments in other fields have rendered a portion of the technology obsolete.   The technology gap is largest for scintillators, which fill a vital niche for planetary applications that require rugged, compact, low-power, low-cost sensors operated at ambienttemperature.  For example, LaBr3 provides higher resolution than previously flown scintillators; however, self-activity (radiolanthanum) obscures planetary gamma ray emissions below about 3 MeV (see Fig. 1). A high-resolution scintillator capable of measuring lower energy gamma rays (e.g. from K and Th) is sought. To fill the gap, we are developing a GRS based on strontium-iodide (SrI2), a very bright, new scintillator [2].  SrI2 will provide a factor of two to four times better energy resolution than scintillators with flight heritage (Table 1).  Measurement of many more elements will be enabled with improved resolution, leading to improved geochemical characterization.   Large, single crystals of SrI2 can be grown, simplifying implementation compared to arrays envisioned for other sensor technologies (CdZnTe) [3].   Low cost, high energy resolution, solid-state read out, absence of self-activity, and the potential for size scalability make SrI2 the best choice amongst competing scintillators (vs. CeBr3 and LaBr3).  We describe the development of low-cost, compact, high-performance GRS instruments, which can be deployed on CubeSats, orbiters, atmospheric probes, landers and rovers in support of mission concepts outlined in the Decadal Survey.  The technology will be used for Discovery missions to targets small and large in the inner and outer solar system.   GRS can provide landing-site geochemical context for New Frontiers sample return missions to a comet and the lunar South Pole-Aitken basin.  Including the GRS on the Venus In Situ Explorer would significantly improve measurements of K/Th, poorly constrained by Venera.   References: [1] Prettyman T. H. (2014), in Encyclopedia of the Solar System ISBN:9780124158450. [2] Cherepy, N. J. et al. (2008), App. Phys. Lett., 92, 083508. [3] Prettyman T.H. et al. (2011), Space Sci. Rev., 163, 371-459.    Fig. 1. Comparison of whole Moon gamma ray  spectra acquired by Lunar Prospector (BGO, red), Kaguya (HPGe, black), and Change’E-2 (LaBr3, blue)  [1].    Table 1. Comparison of selected gamma ray sensor materials for planetary science applications. Material Resolution*  Advantages &  Limitations  Flight   Heritage? HPGe 0.2-0.6% Cryogenic cooling Yes NaI(Tl) 7-8% Low resolution  Yes BGO 9-10% High efficiecny; low resolution Yes LaBr3(Ce) 2.8-3.2% Self-activity, requires PMT readout Yes CeBr3 4%-4.5% Requires PMT readout No SrI2(Eu) 2.8-3.2% Amenable to silicon photodetector readout and digital processing No *Full-at-half-maximum at 662 keV. 2826.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
