 DARe: DARK ASTEROID RENDEZVOUS.  K. S. Noll1, L. A. McFadden1, A. R. Rhoden2, L. F. Lim1, W. V. Boynton3, L. M. Carter1,  G. Collins4, J. A. Englander1,  S. Goossens5, W. M. Grundy6,  J.-Y. Li7, S. Mottola8, , J. Oberst8, R. Orosei9, A. M. Parsons1, F. Preusker8, D. C. Reuter1, A. A. Simon1, C. A. Thomas10, K. Walsh11, M. E. Zolensky12; 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (keith.s.noll@nasa.gov), 2Johns Hopkins/APL, 3University of Arizona, 4Wheaton College, 5University of Maryland, Baltimore County, 6Lowell Observatory, 7Planetary Science Institute, 8DLR Institute of Planetary Research, Berlin, 9ASI/INAF, 10ORAU, 11SwRI, 12NASA/JSC   Introduction Small bodies record the chemical, physical, and dynamical processes that gave birth to and shaped the solar system. The great variety of small bodies reflects the diversity of both their genesis and their histories. The DARe mission conducts a critical test of how small body populations reflect a history of planetary migration and planetesimal scattering. This understanding is crucial for planning future NASA missions and placing current and past missions into context.   Mission Overview The DARe mission is being proposed as a Discovery-class mission in response to the Discovery-13 Announcement of Opportunity February 2015 deadline. DARe will orbit multiple asteroids performing operations at multiple altitudes. DARe builds on previous successful missions using a high heritage spacecraft design taking full advantage of improved capabilities and previous mission experience. The DARe instrument complement likewise builds on successful highheritage instrumentation from previous missions.  The instrument complement fully accomplishes all mission goals with margin, enabling detailed characterization of the surfaces and interiors of our targeted asteroids.  DARe utilizes the latest advances in solar-electric propulsion to construct an extremely robust mission design capable of orbiting multiple asteroids. The DARe mission is enhanced with additional lowvelocity flybys. DARe mission design adapts previous mission operations to efficiently achieve scientific objectives. Mission management follows successful models based on GSFC mission experience with LRO, MAVEN, and OSIRIS-REx. The DARe team includes NASA, university, academic, and corporate partners bringing a diversity of skill and experience to deliver high science return at low cost and risk.  Full details of the DARe mission concept will be presented.     