2837.PDF
THE THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF SOILS WITH BIMODAL GRAIN-SIZES AT MARS PRESSURES.  Michael. T. Mellon1, Christopher P. McKay2, and John. A. Grant3, 1Department of Space Studies, Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO, 2Space Science Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, 3 Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.   Introduction: The thermal properties of planetary surfaces are a valuable tool in probing the characteristics and structure of the regolith and bedrock.  Thermal inertia and its primary component thermal conductivity are typically derived from thermal infrared remote sensing. On Mars, low values are generally associated with fine grained regolith, while high values are associated with rock fragments and bedrock [1,2].  Often, thermal properties are translated to a characteristic particle size through the grain-size dependence of thermal conductivity at martian atmospheric pressures (see Fig 1 and discussion below). This effort is particularly revealing if the geologic context points to natural sorting, as with aeolian bedforms, fluvial channels, and airfall mantles.  Here we report new measurements of the thermal conductivity of natural soils and soil analogs at a range of pressures. At terrestrial atmospheric pressure an intimate mixture of fine and coarse grained particles increases the bulk thermal conductivity over that of each component. However, we show that the effect at martian atmospheric pressures is quite different. The bulk thermal conductivity of a mixture is intermediate but skewed toward smaller grain values at low pressures and toward larger grain values at higher martian pressures. The implications for Mars are discussed. Previous Measurements: Previous studies of the effects of particles size on thermal conductivity at martian pressures have focused on test samples (ground rock or glass beads) with narrow size distributions [3,4]. The effects of gas pressure and density have been well characterized. Few studies have focused on broad particle size distributions or bimodal mixtures [3,5]. These studies reported that the bulk thermal conductivity follows the magnitude and pressure dependence of the large grains in the distribution at martian atmospheric pressures, in contrast to our new results.  Kinetic Theory: A basic model of heat conduction through a porous soil follows from the kinetic theory of gasses and a combination of series and parallel conduction pathways [6,7]. Heat transfer through a soil occurs through grain contacts and thermal radiation, which dominate at lowest pressures, and through gas conduction which dominates at highest pressures. The transition between these extremes depends on the pore size relative to the mean free path of gas molecules. For typical soils the transition occurs at Mars atmospheric pressures, allowing for the distinction between grain sizes from remote sensing data (Figure 1).   Figure 1. Theoretical thermal conductivity of a soil as a function of interstitial gas pressure (shown here for air) and soil grain size [9,10].  New Measurements: Previous, thermal conductivity measurements of planetary soil analogs have utilized a transient heated needle approach [3-5]. In the present study we utilized a guarded-heat-flow method, which offers higher precision and uniform integration over a sample volume. We find that the guarded-heatflow method performs better at low conductivity and for coarse grains.  The guarded-heat-flow cell consists of two copper plate held at precisely controlled temperatures on either side of the sample. Sandwiched between the sample and each plate are heat flux transducers. In equilibrium, the average heat flux and the temperature gradient are recorded and the thermal conductivity directly calculated from Fourier's law.  We tested several samples: i) borosilicate glass beads of narrow size distributions; ii) bimodal mixtures of 2 mm beads and 63-53 µm beads in different ratios; iii) natural soils from the Antarctic Dry Valleys; and iv) bimodal mixtures of Antarctic soil and basalt pebbles at different ratios. Thermal conductivities were measured at air pressures from 0.015 mb to 840 mb. Samples were evacuated for several days. A mean temperature of 20° C was maintained with a gradient across the sample of 7° to 12° C. Measurements were conducted at pressure increments of air up to ambient. Tests in pure CO2 are planned, expecting slightly lower conductivities with the same trends with pressure.  Results: Figure 2 shows typical results for glass beads. The trends with pressure are similar to previous studies and agree well with kinetic theory (Figure 1).  In addition, Figure 2 shows the result of bimodally mixed 2 mm and 53-63 µm glass beads. At high Mars pressures (low elevation) the mixtures exhibit thermal conductivities similar to that of the larger grain size alone. However, in contrast to previous studies, as the 2837.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
pressure decreases the mixture’s conductivity is comparable with that of intermediate-to-small grain sizes.  Over the pressure range we demonstrate that the thermal conductivity of a bimodal mixture follows the pressure dependence of the smaller grains, with an offset associated with the bulk density increase (porosity reduction). This behavior can be explained by the fine-grained soil controlling the overall conductivity pressure trends, while coarse grain inclusions act as pressure-independent thermal short circuits.  Figure 2. Measured thermal conductivity for unimodal-sized glass beads and bimodal mixtures.  We conducted similar tests with an Antarctic soil from Linneaus Terrace in upper Wright Valley and pebbles of Columbia River basalt. These results demonstrate that real geologic materials behave similarly to idealized glass beads. The soil (sieved to <2 mm) has a broad size distribution dominated by 100 µm to 1 mm grains. The pebbles were generated from fragmented rock samples, subrounded by tumbling, and sieved to a 6.7-9.5 mm size range). These materials and their mixtures show the same overall thermal conductivity trend with pressure as do the glass beads (Figure 3).  Mixtures also follow the same pressure trends as with soil, but offset to higher values. As with the glass beads, at high Mars pressures the mixtures exhibit conductivities comaprable to the pebbles, while at low Mars pressures the conductivity is comparable to that of intermediate-to-small grains sizes. Mars Geologic Application: A key finding for Mars is that coarse grained particles (sand, pebbles, or even cobbles) can be partly obscured by the presence of interstitial fines. This result has implications for a number of geologic contexts.  Low thermal inertia regions on Mars have been interpreted as being entirely composed of fine “dust” with a grain size of <40 µm [8]. However, our results suggest that smaller grains (e.g., µm scale like atmospheric dust [9]) mixed with sand, pebbles, or cobbles will also explain the observations (the coarser fragments may be present but partly obscured). Hence, the grain character of deposits emplaced by a wide range of processes (e.g., mass-wasting, fluvial, or glacial) may be under predicted based on measured thermal inertia, especially in higher albedo areas where significant dust is expected.  Dunes and bedforms are naturally sorted. The size of the grains, as determined from remote sensing compared with a unimodal size fraction, has been compared with models of grain saltation at Mars atmospheric pressures [10,11]. However, we find that finer dust settled into the sand interstices would reduce the thermal inertia and lead to an underestimate of grain sizes. Bedforms have been observed at high elevation in regions of low thermal inertia where individual grains sizes are thought to be too small for saltation leading to the hypothesis of saltating dust aggregates [12]. Our results imply significant sand sized grains may also be present, but thermally obscured by dust incorporated between grains at the surface. In contrast, within low-elevations (high pressure) regions, where thermal inertias are observed to be higher, coarse grained soils may also contain substantial interstitial dust. In this case the dust may be obscured by the presence of coarse fragments.  Figure 3. Measurements of natural Antarctic soils and basalt pebble mixtues.  Conclusions: We have conducted new measurements of the thermal conductivity of glass beads and natural soils with mixed particle sizes. We found that: • The guarded heat flow method works better for large grain sizes, mixed soils, and low conductivities. • The thermal conductivity of mixed soil-grain sizes at Mars pressures is intermediate to that of the component values. The conductivity follows the pressure dependence of the smallest size fraction.  • The interpretations of low thermal inertia regions of Mars are more complex than thought. Large particles may be present in substantial quantities and partly obscured in thermal remote sensing. References: [1] Palluconi & Kieffer, 1981; [2] Mellon et al., 2000; [3] Woodside & Messmer, 1961; [4] Presley & Christensen, 1997a; [5] Presley & Christensen, 1997b; [6] Jakosky, 1986; [7] Mellon et al., 2008; [8] Christensen, 1986; [9] Toon et al., 1977; [10] Edgett & Christensen, 1991; [11] Fenton & Mellon, 2006; [12] Bridges et al., 2010. 2837.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
