2844.PDF
COMPARING LAMP POLAR MEASUREMENTS TO LADEE EQUATORIAL MEASUREMENTS OF HELIUM IN THE LUNAR EXOSPHERE. D. M. Hurley1, M. Benna2, J. C. Cook3, J. Halekas4, C. Grava5, K. Retherford5, P. D. Feldman6, P. Mahaffy2, R. R. Hodges7, R. C. Elphic8; 1Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD (dana.hurley@jhuapl.edu); 2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD; 3Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO; 4University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA; 5Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, TX; 6Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD7University of Colorado, Boulder, CO; 8NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA.   Introduction: Helium is prevalent in the lunar exosphere.  It predominantly comes from alpha particles in the solar wind that get neutralized on contact with the surface of the Moon.  Some contribution from lunar outgassing is also possible.  Helium was first detected by the LACE instrument [1], which is a mass spectrometer deployed by the Apollo 17 crew in the ALSEP package.  It was later detected spectrally by the LAMP instrument onboard LRO [2].  Most recently, the NMS instrument onboard LADEE mapped the density at orbital altitude [3]. Observations:  During the LADEE mission, the unique opportunity existed to observed helium in the lunar exosphere from three perspectives.  LADEE NMS detects the helium atoms in situ.  The LADEE orbit covered a range of altitudes and local times in the band within 20° of the equator.  During commissioning, the altitude was 250 km.  The orbit was lowered to an elliptical orbit with periapsis < 50 km in the Science Phase. The Commissioning orbit went from Oct. 2013 through Nov 2013.  The science orbit went from Nov 2013 through April 2014. Simultaneously, the pair of ARTEMIS spacecraft in highly elliptical orbits around the moon measure the plasma environment in the lunar proximity.  The ion data can be reduced to estimate the flux of alpha particles to the lunar surface. Therefore, throughout the LADEE mission information on the solar wind source of the helium exosphere exists. In addition, the LAMP instrument onboard LRO detects helium at 58.4 nm. LRO is in a polar orbit that precesses in local time.  During the LADEE mission LRO's orbit is elliptical with periapsis over the south pole at 30 km and apoapsis over the north pole at 200 km.  LAMP observes exospheric helium when the viewing geometry is that the boresight of the instrument intersects the dark side of the moon, but the path includes an illuminated portion of the exosphere. In a polar orbit, this occurs at high latitudes. Thus, for six months, we have simultaneous measurements of the polar exosphere, the equatorial exosphere, and the solar wind source. We compare the three datasets. Model:  A global exosphere model is applied to compare the data from across the LADEE orbit and from the changing local time of the LRO orbit.  The model is a Monte Carlo model that uses the incident solar wind distribution as the spatial distribution of the source [4].  The energy of the initial release of helium is thermal.  As the particles reencounter the surface, they thermalize to the local surface temperature. Conclusions:  Comparisions of the polar helium exosphere and the equatorial helium exosphere of the Moon are made.  These are related to the solar wind source through measurements.  These are used to validate a global exosphere model of helium on the Moon.   As a non-condensible gas, helium follows a T-5/2 distribution in the exosphere, meaning that the surface density is inversely related to the surface temperature.  Owing to the large hop length of helium, the effective surface temperature to use is an average over a spatial extent. Thus the polar exosphere is less sensitive to local time than the equatorial helium exosphere. Both LAMP and LADEE show a decrease in helium density as the Moon passes through the Earth's magnetotail.  This results from the turning off of the source of alpha particles from the solar wind. References:  [1] Hodges, JGR 1973. [2] Stern et al., GRL 2012. [3] Benna et al., submitted [4]  Crider and Vondrak, JGR 2000. 2844.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
