2874.PDF
RECONSTRUCTION OF THE EROS SHAPE MODEL USING NEAR LASER RANGEFINDER DATA E. G. Kahn1, O.S. Barnouin1, M. G. Daly2, C. L. Johnson3, J. Seabrook2 1The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory,11100 Johns Hopkins Road, Laurel, MD, USA (eliezer.kahn@jhuapl.edu) 2York University, 4700 Keele St, Toronto,Ontario, Canada 3University of British Columbia, 6335 Stores Road, Vancouver, BC. Canada.Introduction: In preparation of the upcomingOSIRIS-REx mission to the Bennu asteroid, we areenhancing current algorithms for reconstructing theshape and local topographic models of the asteroidusing data collected by the OSIRIS-REx Laser Altimeter (OLA), a scanning laser altimeter contributedto the mission by the Canadian Space Agency. Weare testing our algorithms on data collected by theNEAR laser rangefinder (NLR), which acquired over15 million returns while in orbit around the asteroidEros. We present an approach to reconstruct a shapemodel of the Eros asteroid intended to minimize initialspacecraft position and attitude errors associated withlidar returns. The results will become inputs to a morerigorous cross-over, or strip-adjustment, approach tominimize any remaining errors.Method: A shape model constructed from uncorrected (raw) lidar data contains errors due to spacecraftposition and attitude uncertainties. To obtain a moreaccurate shape model, it is necessary to reduce theseerrors in a correction usually called a strip-adjustment.We start with a low-resolution shape model usingthe uncorrected lidar data. We then perform strip adjustments to reduce the errors between the lidar dataand the shape model. A new shape model is then generated with the adjusted lidar results. An iteration between estimates of the shape model and the lidar datais then repeated until errors are minimized and no further change in the shape model is achieved.Shape Model Estimation. The Generic MappingTools (GMT [1]) is used to construct a gridded shapemodel. The median of all lidar points are collectedin each grid, usually a 2 by 2 bin. These points arethen modeled using a Delaunay triangulation to setup a spherical interpolation in tension [2]. The output grid is converted into a high-density shape modelthat is oversampled near the poles compared to the extremities of the asteroid. This oversampling can yieldunrealistic shape model artifacts; therefore, the shapemodel is resampled so that the plate areas are moreuniform. The shape model produced approximatelyreproduces the shape observed in images gathered bythe NEAR spacecraft. With this initial low-resolutionshape model in hand, we begin to undertake stripadjustments.Strip-Adjustment. The NLR data collected by thespacecraft were highly heterogeneous in spatial density and coverage. Experience indicates, however, thatfor data acquired over a short time window, a simpletranslation and rotation (i.e., a rigid transformation) isusually enough to adjust the lidar data so that they better match our initial (as well as updated) asteroid surface. Our algorithm begins by first dividing the lidarpoints into small windows such that during each window, the data does not wind too far around the asteroid,ensuring that rigid transformation is sufficient to correct the data within each window. For each lidar pointin a set (S) of points, the closest point on the asteroid iscomputed. A corresponding set of closest target points(T) is formed. A point-matching scheme (a variationof the Iterative Closest Point algorithm described in[3]) is used to find the optimal translation and rotationto match the source points, S, to the target points, T.The optimal transformation is applied to the originallidar points, S, as well as to the spacecraft positions toproduce the improved data. This procedure is repeatedfor each time window.Results: We tested the algorithm using two approaches. First, we compared the reconstructed shapemodel with the Eros shape model derived by RobertGaskell using Stereo-Photoclinometry, or SPC, [4,6]as well as the Eros shape model produced by the NLRteam where gridded NLR data was fit with a highorder spherical harmonic [5]. To do this we compute the mean distance between each vertex of the reconstructed shape model and the closest point in theSPC or spherical harmonic model. After running thesurface reconstruction but before running the stripadjustment, the mean error compared to the SPC shapemodel is ≈27 m and the mean error compared to thespherical harmonic model is ≈17 m. After runningthe strip-adjustment once and rerunning the surface reconstruction on the improved data, the error comparedto the SPC model is reduced by 2 m to ≈25 m and theerror compared to the spherical harmonic model is reduced by 4 m to ≈13 m. Some of this error in the SPCcomparison is a result of a 10 m bias known to existbetween SPC and NLR range measurements. Figure 1shows images of these four shape models.As an additional way to test the approach, we computed the mean distance of the lidar points to the closest points on the shape model both before and after strip-adjustment. After producing an initial shapemodel of Eros, but before undertaking a first iterationof the strip-adjustment, the mean distance is ≈33.5 m.After a first iteration of the our strip-adjustment algorithm, and the rebuilding of a new shape model, thelocation of our data are improved by over 50%, with2874.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Figure 1: The shape model derived by SPC (top left, 196608 plates [4]), the NLR team (top right, 129600 plates [5]),shape model reconstructed as described in this paper before strip-adjustment (bottom left, 129792 plates), and shapemodel reconstructed as described in this paper after strip-adjustment (bottom right, 129792 plates).the mean distance reduced to ≈15.5 m. Additional iterations typically produce more moderate changes. Byway of comparison, before strip-adjustment the meandistance is ≈40.3 m compared to the SPC model and≈35.0 m compared to the spherical harmonic model.After strip-adjustment, the mean distance is ≈31.5 mcompared to the SPC model and 21.3 m compared tothe spherical harmonic model.References: [1] Wessel P. et al. (2013) EOS Trans.AGU, 94, 409-410, 2013. [2] Renka, R. J. (1997) AMCTrans. Math. Software, 23(3), 435-442. [3] Besl P.J. et al. (1992) IEEE Trans. Pattern. Anal. Mach.Intell., 14, 239- 256. [4] Gaskell R. W. et al. (2008)Meteor. Planet. Sci., 43, 1049-1061. [5] 433 ErosNLR Shape Data (2002), NEAR Collected Shape andGravity Models V1.0, NASA Planetary Data System.[6] Gaskell R. et al. (2008) Gaskell Eros Shape ModelV1.0, NASA Planetary Data System.Acknowledgments: This work was funded by theOSIRIS-REx mission under NASA’s New FrontierProgram.2874.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
	RECONSTRUCTION OF THE EROS SHAPE MODEL USING NEAR LASER RANGEFINDER DATA	Introduction	Method	Results	References	Acknowledgments