2875.PDF
NAAKI: A TWIN CUBESAT MISSION TO THE MOON. M. P. Milazzo1,?, T. Stone1, J. Heynssens2, P. Flikkema2, I. Daubar3,A. Springmann4; 1Astrogeology Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ, 2Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ,3NASA Postdoctoral Program Fellow; Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 4University ofArizona, Tucson, AZ; ?moses@usgs.govIntroduction: NASA's Small, Innovative Missions for Planetary Exploration (SIMPLEx) solicitation calls for CubeSat [1] missions for non-terrestrial and non-solar science with a lifetime costof less than $5.6M . Interplanetary missions are encouraged. Herewe describe a mission concept to the Moon to improve our understanding of its surface photometry as well as to monitor the nearEarth impact flux.The Naaki (the Navajo word for "two") mission concept is tosend two identical 3U (30-cm x 10-cm x 10-cm) CubeSats (named"Ooljee" and "Muuyaw", from the Navajo and Hopi words forthe Moon, respectively) into complimentary, 20,000-km orbits (for∼1.7-km/pixel ground scale with a 10◦ Field of View (FOV)) ofthe Moon for full-disk observations. These full-disk observationswould be used to meet two main science mission goals (plus othersbased on possible Science Enhancement Opportunities).Science Objectives: The Naaki mission concept meets several of the 2013 Planetary Science Decadal Survey [2] (Table 1).Table 1: Decadal Survey Science Questions/Goals addressed byNaaki:Goal MeasurementCharacterize planetary surfacesSurface scattering via photometric response surveyCharacterize surface modification processPhotometric changesUnderstand recent impactflux of inner solar systemImpact flash monitoringImpactor Flux Monitoring: The Naaki science mission wouldinclude monitoring of the lunar impact flux via "full-disc" nightside observations. These observations would be intended to catchlunar impactor flashes. Major observing campaigns would be conducted during major meteor shower events, such as the Leonids,which have been shown to cause impact flashes [10]. The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) has identified at least547 Low Reflectance Changes (LRCs) and 48 High ReflectanceChanges (HRCs) that suggest a minimum impact rate of 364,000new craters per year [11], although it is not clear how many ofthese are primaries and how many are secondaries. We do not propose that Naaki would be able to observe these changes but wouldrather help constrain the impact flux by monitoring night-time impact flash occurrences. There have been several Earth-based impactflash monitoring campaigns c.f. [12, 13, 14, 15], though these campaigns suffer from viewing opportunities limited to the near-sideand lunar phase of 10% to 50% for various reasons. Naaki's observations would not be limited in such a manner and could observethe entire moon and during every nighttime pass and every lunarphase, as desired. Two satellites observing with different viewinggeometries will greatly improve false positive rejection, locationdetermination, and flash brightness determination and thus energyrelease estimates.Photometric Observations: Photometric normalization ofsurface images is required to achieve highly accurate mapping ofvarious scientifically interesting properties of the lunar surface c.f.,[3, 4, 5, 6]. Lunar observing geometries would be such that simultaneous observations of the illuminated (same incidence angle) disk would be taken from different phase angles. During thelifetime of the mission, the spacecraft would also migrate throughvarying incidence angles, for a full suite of photometric observations, providing for the first time full phase and incidence anglecoverage of the entire Moon. The USGS's Robotic Lunar Observatory (ROLO) [7, 8] has obtained photometric observations ofthe Moon over the spectral range appropriate for Earth-observingas well as interplanetary satellites (0.347 − 2.39µm) and oversolar phase angles of 1.55◦ − 97◦. Naaki's observations wouldextend these photometric studies (possibly at a slightly reducedspectral range and resolution) to the entire Moon. A wavelengthdependent visible and infrared spectrophotometric function fortwo lunar terrain end-members: highlands and maria was derived by [9]. Naaki's observations would allow the ground-truthconstrained ROLO observations to be extended to all regions onthe far side of the Moon, thus allowing derivations such as that by[9] to be extended to more terrain types across the full surface ofthe Moon.The purpose of having two satellites observing simultaneouslyis that never before has the entire lunar surface been mapped withsimultaneous observations from two differing phase angles. Obtaining simultaneous observations at differing phase angles reducesthe likelihood of losing phase angle coverage due to complications,provides incidence-angle-independence for at least two phase angles at a time over the entire photometry study, and . In addition,observations from multiple viewing geometries significantly decreases the required mission lifetime; the suite of phase angles willbe covered in far shorter time with minimally increased cost (majorcosts will be development and operations).Mission Design: To be consistent with CubeSat ideals and tosave on costs, this mission would be designed, built, and operatedby university students (graduate and undergraduate) at NorthernArizona University (NAU) in Flagstaff, AZ and The University ofArizona (U of A) in Tucson, AZ. The students would operate undersupervision by professors at NAU and researchers at the U.S. Geological Survey Astrogeology Science Center (ASC) in Flagstaff,and at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, CA. Thespacecraft would be launched with NASA's EM-1 mission in 2018or with another mission as the opportunity arises. The twin spacecraft would consist of Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) components modified at NAU as necessary to meet specific mission2875.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
goals and requirements. The mission components will include a 3axis (star tracker and reaction wheels) attitude and control system(ACS), an X-Band radio and antenna, an EPS and battery (40Wh),thermal control, fixed and deployable solar array, and a camerawith spectral sensitivity in the visible to near infrared and with a10◦ FOV.Engineering Innovations: To date, there have been no interplanetary CubeSat or other micro-satellite missions, so simplymoving a CubeSat beyond LEO could be considered innovative.However, there are several proposed or actively developed interplanetary CubeSat missions e.g., [16, 17], which include innovativeoperations, communications, propulsion, and navigation technologies. Our mission's innovative technologies will include modifications to the reaction wheel ACS to allow momentum dumpingwith other than mass expulsion (NASA is understandably reluctantto allow compressed gas containers on secondary payloads such asCubeSats) or magnetic control torques (the Moon has a negligible magnetic field). That stated, if allowed by NASA, the missionwould include a small store of Xe or other noble gas for micro iondrive propulsion. If an ion drive is not approved, solar sails willlikely be the method used for Lunar orbit insertion.In addition, utilizing two CubeSats in Lunar orbit may allow usto experiment with lunar communications infrastructure. For example, if one of the two satellites is placed in a polar, terminatorfollowing orbit, while performing its science mission duties itcould also act as a relay for the second satellite when the it is unableto view the Earth.Complications for Interplanetary Missions: As already noted,there are several complications with small satellites operating ininterplanetary space. These include: Communications: The onlycommunications station currently readily capable of communicating with a small spacecraft at Lunar distances is the Deep SpaceNetwork (DSN), but its costs are very nearly prohibitive for asmall, low-cost mission such as allowed by the SIMPLEx solicitation. The INSPIRE mission [16] design includes developing innovative communications technologies, including the potential useof Arecibo as a communications link, but it is not clear that suchcommunications technology would be ready for a lunar-orbitingCubeSat science mission on the timescale of the SIMPLEx/Naaki'smission goals. Navigation and Propulsion: A 3-axis ACS is available COTS, but desaturation of CubeSat reaction wheels in lunarorbit requires a momentum dumping mechanism other than magnetic torquing or mass expulsion. We are investigating modifyinga COTS reaction wheel module to allow electrical braking (andbattery charge regeneration) as a mechanism for converting rotational momentum into electrical potential and ultimately using thisfor reaction wheel desaturation. Another reaction wheel desaturation technique may be to deploy solar sails when necessary toprovide the required torques. Radiation Protection: The low-cost,low-mass goals for CubeSat missions requires use of COTS components that may not have been adequately proven space-worthy.It may be cheaper and more effective to shield the entirety of thespacecraft (with the exception of the camera lens and the ion driveif included) than to attempt to shield or radiation harden each component separately. We are considering this as the likely radiationshielding method for the Naaki spacecraft. Hydrogen-rich materials such as polyethylene provide effective shielding [18], thoughaluminum CubeSat external shielding panels are readily available.The particular shielding material used will depend on further investigations.Conclusions: Naaki offers an unprecedented CubeSat mission concept to monitor the lunar impactor flux on both the nearand far-sides of the Moon, to provide greatly improved coveragein both phase angle and time for photometric studies of the lunarsurface and for large scale photometric changes of the Moon. TheCubeSat mission model offers exceptional opportunities to university students as well as early-career researchers, of which the Naakimission concept takes full-advantage, providing multiple lunar science goals at low-cost (< $5.6M ).References:[1] Heidt, H, Puig-Suari, J, Moore, A, et al. (2000). [2] ThePlanetary Science Decadal Survey, C. Vision and Voyages:For Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022. NationalAcademies Press (2011). [3] McEwen, A. Lunar andPlanetary Science Conference, vol. 27, p. 841 (1996).[4] Hillier, JK, Buratti, BJ, and Hill, K. Icarus, 141:205-225(1999). [5] Besse, S, Sunshine, J, Staid, M, et al. Icarus,222:229-242 (2013). [6] Hicks, M, Buratti, B, Nettles, J,et al. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets(1991-2012), 116 (2011). [7] Stone, TC, and Kieffer, HH.Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 4814, pp. 211-221 (2002).[8] Kieffer, HH, and Stone, TC. The Astronomical Journal,129:2887 (2005). [9] Buratti, B, Hicks, M, Nettles, J, et al.Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets (1991-2012), 116(2011). [10] Yanagisawa, M, Ohnishi, K, Takamura, Y, et al.Icarus, 182:489-495 (2006). [11] Robinson, M, Bowles, Z,Daubar, I, et al. AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, vol. 1, p. 1752(2013). [12] Suggs, RM, Cooke, WJ, Suggs, RJ, et al. Earth,Moon, and Planets, 102:293-298 (2008). [13] Oberst, J,Christou, A, Suggs, R, et al. Planetary and Space Science,74:179-193 (2012). [14] Suggs, RM, Cooke, WJ, Koehler,HM, et al. Meteoroids Conference, pp. 116-124 (2011).[15] Suggs, R, Moser, D, Cooke, W, et al. Icarus, 238:23-36(2014). [16] Klesh, A, Baker, J, Bellardo, J, et al.Proceedings of the AIAA/USU Small Satellite Conference,Logan, UT (2013). [17] Cohen, BA, Hayne, P, Banazadeh, P,et al. Annual Meeting of the Lunar Exploration AnalysisGroup (2013). [18] Guetersloh, S, Zeitlin, C, Heilbronn, L,et al. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics ResearchSection B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms,252:319-332 (2006).2875.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
