2895.PDF
TOOLS FOR ENABLING REAL TIME VOLATILE PROSPECTING WITH SURFACE ROVERS  M. C. Deans1, D. S. Lees2, T. E. Cohen3, Y. J. Lee3, T. Smith1, S. R. Wolfe1, J. L. Heldmann1, A. Colaprete1, R. Elphic1, and D. Lim1.  1NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA. 2Carnegie Mellon Silicon Valley, Moffett Field, CA. 3Stinger-Ghaffarian Technologies Inc., Moffett  Field, CA. Overview: In October 2014, we tested our Exploration Ground Data System (xGDS) in simulated lunar polar volatile prospecting: the Mojave Volatiles Prospector (MVP) field test.  Testing showed real time lunar rover science operations are enabled by xGDS. xGDS comprises web-based services for science operations including tools for planning, monitoring, visualization, documentation, analysis, and search.  We used a mix of existing and new tools to support distributed science operations. xGDS has been tested in several other analog missions, allowing us to learn lessons across multiple use cases[1]. Background: MVP used NASA Ames’ KRex2 rover with the Neutron Spectrometer Subsystem (NSS) and Near Infra-Red Volatile Spectrometer Subsystem (NIRVSS) both from RESOLVE[2], and TextureCam[3], in the Mojave Desert[4,5] with a science team at Ames and a rover operations team in the Mojave[6]. MVP had three objectives: (1) mature instrument operations of NIRVSS and NSS, (2) mature xGDS tools, and (3) understand emplacement, retention, and distribution of water in the Mojave Desert, in particular correlation between hydration and surface clast cover.  NIRVSS and NSS measured surface and subsurface water. TextureCam measured clast cover.  xGDS enabled the team to maintain situation awareness, analyze and visualize prospecting data, decide what to do next, and create new plans for the rover to execute. Use Cases: xGDS is designed to support four mission phases: Planning uses a-priori map information e.g. remote sensing data, known operational hazards or constraints, and targets of interest.  xGDS enables teams to import, create and share map content and collaboratively edit plans.  Monitoring is done via mapand plot-based tools to visualize payload telemetry and vehicle position in real-time, and also includes realtime and post-hoc documentation and annotation.   Archiving tools ingest telemetry, reducing data to meaningful and efficient representations and organizing it into searchable databases. Exploring uses capabilities to quickly find out what was collected, where and when it was collected, and search for particular kinds of data and correlations between them.  Realtime semantic labeling greatly facilitates this; users use xGDS to add notes to data products and timelines. Approach: Our work makes significant use of open standards and open source software. Both enable us to rapidly build scalable systems that are effective, easy to use, and easy to share with our collaborators.  Planner (Fig. 1) shows a map view and a nested list of waypoints and segments (level 1), activities at waypoints and on segments (level 2), and parameters for activities such as instrument settings (level 3). It shows map layers for context, and computes plan timelines using nominal activity durations and estimated average rover speed. It outputs multiple formats, including XML that is translated to a file KRex loads and executes autonomously, as well as KML for viewing. Console Log allows users to write notes in real time which are linked to metadata including time, author, console, rover location, and user-defined tags.  The shared console log is visible across all of the consoles. Users can see all entries in an integrated timeline view, and search or filter entries. The MVP team recorded about 2,000 log entries in one week of science ops. Time-Based Plots (Fig. 2) show telemetry values vs. time in a set of axes which are synchronized so that the time axes remain aligned as plots update in real time.  The plots allow zooming and panning the time axes of the plots together, or scaling the y-axis of any one plot to explore details in data. This enabled e.g. correlating water signatures from NIRVSS and NSS. Raster Maps (Fig. 3) creates heatmaps from telemetry using rover location to map the data. This made it possible to quickly see where prospecting instruments detected increased water signatures visualized as a red to yellow spot against a blue to green background. Video Player (Fig. 4) updates displayed images on arrival at rates between 1 sec and 8 sec per frame, and converts image streams to the standard H.264 format for archive viewing. Replay has familiar controls (play, pause, rewind, etc.) and a time slider to control multiple time synced video playback displays.  Notes can be taken in real time or during playback to annotate past events linked to images and video segments. Integration: KRex and payload telemetry used DDS[7].  Telemetry streams were integrated within xGDS so that payload telemetry could be geolocated using the rover location.  Users connected to xGDS over a regular web browser. Field Test: Within the MVP test, our objective for xGDS was to evaluate usability and effectiveness of tools in the context of a short duration, high-tempo lunar surface volatiles rover mission. Real time science data analysis was done continuously throughought the day. An assessment team at Ames conducted observation, measured workload and situation awareness metrics and collected user feedback. 2895.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
Results: The tests showed that real time lunar surface science is enabled by capabilities in xGDS.  Our tools enabled scientists to work together effectively, create and organize plans, understand and keep track of what is being done during rover operations, efficiently re-plan on the fly, and analyze and explore their data after the operations are over.  xGDS is flexible and extensible, allowing us to quickly respond to new feature requests to support field teams. Future Work: We are continuing development of xGDS capabilities for several different use cases, including a future lunar volatile prospecting mission as well as future terrestrial field science deployments including surface rovers, underwater ROVs, and scuba divers. xGDS is also being prepared for open source release to enable a wider user and developer community to use and contribute to this software platform. Conclusion: We are developing and field testing xGDS in order to understand the costs, benefits, limitations, and capabilities of this new approach to ground data systems.  Our use of powerful open source web software, open standards, and testing in multiple field tests has helped us to efficiently create powerful and flexible tools for mission control ground data systems.  These tools have broad applicability to crew missions, robotic missions, and new destinations.  References: [1] M. C. Deans, D. Lees, T. Smith, T. E. Cohen, T. F. Morse, T. W. Fong, Abs. #2518, LPSC, 2012. [2] Quinn, J.; Baird, S.; Colaprete, A.; Larson,  W.; Sanders, G.; Picard, M., KSC-2011-163, 2011. [3] Wagstaff et al. (2013) Geophys. Res. Letters, 40. [4] Wood, Y. A. et al. (2002) Journal of Arid Environments 52 (3): 305-317.  [5] Wood, Y. A. et al. (2005) Catena, 59 (2): 205-230.  [6] J. L. Heldmann, et al., to appear in LPSC 2015.  [7] OMG Available Specification formal/07-01-01, Version 1.2, 2007.   Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the OCT Game Changing Development Program (GCD) and the SMD “Moon and Mars Analog Mission Activities” Program (MMAMA).  NSS and NIRVSS instruments were developed under the HEOMD Advanced Exploration Systems Program (AES). TextureCam was developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, under NASA grant NNH10ZDA001N-ASTID.  Figure 1. xGDS planner shows a map view and lists of waypoints, activities, and activity parameters.  Figure 2. xGDS time-based plot of instrument telemetry shows multiple telemetry points with a synchronized time axis to show correlated information.  Figure 3. xGDS raster maps show NSS data vs. vehicle location; elevated hydrogen signature appear as red.   Figure 4. Video Player shows latest image from each camera, and replays archived video encoded and compressed from incoming still frames.  2895.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
