2901.PDF
THE PLANETARY GIS/DATA LAB AT THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO.  David P. Mayer1, Edwin S. Kite1, 1University of Chicago - Planetary Science, Planetary Atmospheres, and Exoplanets (kite@uchicago.edu).  Summary: The University of Chicago has a new Planetary GIS/Data Lab. A primary focus of the Lab is Mars geomorphology. Initial results from the lab are described.  Equipment: Current equipment includes a SOCET SET workstation with a True3Di monitor; two additional GIS workstations; and 16 TB of RAID-5 storage. The workstations provide 24 cores for processing. Additional storage (10 TB) and processing capability is provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center's "Midway" cluster. We have two dedicated nodes on Midway (giving 32 cores), and access to up to 2 x 106 additional CPU hours per year through the Research Computing Center's time allocation program. In the most recent allocation cycle,   2 x 106 additional CPU hours were allocated of 2 x 106 CPU hours requested.  A particular focus of the lab is integrating spatially resolved Mars paleoclimate models (both GCMs and mesoscale models) with the geologic record. In most cases, the "Midway" nodes will be used for climate modeling, and the workstations for DTM generation and data processing for climate-sensitive areas of Mars.  Projects: A primary focus of the Lab is using Mars geomorphology to constrain long-term habitability change on Mars. (Europa and Enceladus, Io and the Moon are secondary interests; currently there are only a few rocky exoplanets with spatially resolved data). Mars projects include:  (1) Measuring long profiles (and catchment geometries) for the valleys that source Mars alluvial fans. The purpose of these measurements is to constrain runoffgenerating processes relatively late in Mars history.  (2) Measuring layer orientations and unconformity orientations in the Valles Marineris layered deposits (sedimentary-rock mountains). The purpose of these measurements is to constrain models of mountain construction and destruction.  (3) Measuring the erosional states of shallow-floored Noachian craters that are part of mutually-crosscutting pairs and triplets of craters. The ultimate purpose of these measurements is to exploit crosscutting relationships to statistically reconstruct the timing and timescales of Noachian erosional events that are hard to date directly.  Initial results: The Lab was set up in January 2015. We will present initial results from the Lab at the conference.     2901.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
