 Surface Investigations of Asteroids: Science Justification and the Need for Instrument Development.   K. K. John1, P. A. Abell1, and L. D. Graham1, 1NASA Johnson Space Center, 2101 NASA Parkway, Houston, Texas 77058, kristen.k.john@nasa.gov, paul.a.abell@nasa.gov, lee.d.graham@nasa.gov   Introduction:  One of NASA's current objectives is to send humans to an asteroid.  To make this goal feasible, it is critical to perform in-situ measurements to characterize these surfaces in order to understand the environment that astronauts, vehicles, and equipment will be exposed to while exploring.  Currently, there is very little knowledge about the geophysical and geotechnical properties of asteroids.  There is a lack of scientific data on the properties of regolith, as well as a lack of understanding of how regolith responds in its unique microgravity environment [1].  To truly understand the data from remote sensing, surface interaction is key.  Characterizing the surface, the regolith, and its properties all feeds into obtaining ground truth.  Need For Surface Interaction and In-Situ Investigations: Near-Earth asteroids come within 121 million miles of the Sun [2].  Asteroids are of scientific interest largely because of the information they will provide about the origins of the Solar System.  Asteroids are also important for exploration, particularly carbonaceous asteroids that could provide opportunities for insitu resource utilization.  Asteroid detection capabilities are being improved and missions like NEOWISE are identifying more reasonable targets for future robotic and human missions.  However, technology development is needed to enable these future missions to perform meaningful science objectives.   Understanding the Effects of Regolith: The surfaces of airless planetary bodies are covered with a layer of dust particles, rock fragments, and glass particles called regolith.  When NASA sends missions to an asteroid, and eventually to Mars, many of the subsystems could be affected such as instruments, spacesuits, airlocks, vehicles, hardware, robotics, and the crew.  It is critical that regolith studies be done in order to understand the environment that astronauts and equipment will face. Consensus in the Planetary Science Community: In a Planetary Science Decadal Survey (PSDS) white paper, the planetary science community agrees that "future missions should focus more on in-situ investigations" stating that "at present, we do not have enough new instruments" and that "basic laboratory research with potential in-situ instrument development even at laboratory scale (TRL0) should be strongly supported" [3].  Another PSDS white paper on asteroids states that "for insitu science, probes and small landers need to be developed that can accommodate a range of instrumentation" [4].  Several Small Body Assessment Group (SBAG) proceedings also confirm the need for asteroid missions, stating that technology development is necessary including instrumentation for in-situ study [5].     Figure 1: Surfaces of Itokawa showing rough terrain on the left and smooth terrain on the right (Image: JAXA)  Past and Current Asteroid Missions: This section provides a brief description of relevant missions and instruments. Several of these missions were limited to remote sensing. NEAR: NASA and Johns Hopkins' Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) Shoemaker spacecraft rendezvoused with asteroid Eros in 2001, becoming the first spacecraft to land on the surface of an asteroid.  It used innovative sensors and detection equipment to take images of the surface and collect information on Eros' structure and composition [2].  NEAR made several discoveries, including the presence of a layer of debris resulting from a long history of impacts. Hayabusa:  JAXA's Hayabusa mission to nearEarth asteroid Itokawa was the first to land on, take off from, and return samples from an asteroid.  Hayabusa's mini-lander called MINERVA (Micro/Nano Experimental Robot Vehicle for Asteroid) was unsuccessful, but would have used its three small color cameras to relay images of the surface of the asteroid [6]. Dawn:  NASA's Dawn visited Vesta in 2011, becoming the first spaceraft to visist a main-belt asteroid.  Dawn will arrive at Ceres in 2015.  However, its capabilities are limited to remote sensing [7]. Rosetta:  ESA's Rosetta rendezvoused with Comet 67P in August 2014.  In November, it became the first spacecraft to land on a comet.  The 100 kg lander, Philae, detected "dust and debris ranging from millimeter to meter sizes" [8].  Comets, like asteroids, will reveal information about the formation of the Solar System. Hayabusa 2:  JAXA successfully launched their second asteroid mission in December 2014, which is set to arrive at a carbonaceous near-Earth asteroid, 1999 JU3, in 2018.  JAXA will send the Mobile Asteroid Surface Scout (MASCOT) lander to the surface.  MASCOT will in-situ map the asteroid's geomorphology, the intimate structure, texture and composition of the regolith [6,9].  Hayabusa 2 will also have three MINERVA mini-landers.  OSIRIS-REx:  NASA's OSIRIS-REx will launch in 2016 to carbonaceous, near-Earth asteroid Bennu, arriving in 2018.  It will use imagers and spectrometers to gather information about the topography, mineralogy, and chemistry [10].  Several of these capabilities are limited to remote sensing.  The in-situ capabilities such as the SamCam will help to document the samples obtained from the sample acquisition mechanism. Fly-by missions: In the last 25 years, several missions observed asteroids remotely [7].  The Galileo spacecraft took images of asteroids Gaspra and Ida.  Rosetta, on its way to Comet 67P, took images of asteroids Steins and Lutetia. NEAR, on its way to Eros, flew by asteroid Mathilde.  Similarly, Stardust, Chang'e 2, Deep Space 1, Vega 2, and Deep Impact have all encountered asteroids or comets.  None of these missions visited the surface.  A review of these heritage missions involving asteroids further supports that surface interaction is considerably lacking.   The Need to Visit the Surface: As useful as these missions have been, they fail to produce the type of data that can only be acquired on the surface.  Ground observations, rendezvouses, and fly-bys can provide information on rotation rates, asteroid taxonomic class, general composition, shape, and size.  However, we must investigate the surface to determine internal structure, detailed composition, surface topography, collisional history, particle size distribution, particle behavior, and mechanical properties of the particles. Interacting with the Surface: The missions discussed above did/will not all involve surface interaction.  In fact, the only tools used for asteroid surface interaction to date are for Hayabusa, where a slug fired into the regolith was meant to disturb the surface and collect samples.  In contrast, on the Moon, the astronauts used a number of manual tools, as well as rover wheels to disturb the surface.  Martian tools include the MSL, Viking, and Phoenix rover arms.  Lessons learned from Apollo and Mars experiences can be applied to the next generation of tool development.  Asteroid Science and Associated Instruments: The planetary science community has detailed what science should be investigated on the surface.  For each of these scientific objectives, associated instruments have been considered.  The table begins with global charac  terization and works its way down to surface and subsurface characterization.  Table 1: Asteroid Science and Associated Instrumentation Asteroid Science Associated Instrumentation Global properties: mass, shape, density, rotation, porosity Radioscience measurements, LIDAR, imagers, spectrometers Presence of volatiles Spectrometers, hyperspectral imagers, micro-GPR (ground penetrating radar) Local magnetic field detection Micro-magnetometer Interior and surface structure Passive/active seismic measurements, radar Topography Imagers, optical cameras, LIDAR, radar Mineralogical composition Visible, near-IR, x-ray, gamma-ray spectrometer; hyperspectral imagers Radiation characterization Dosimeter Temperature, thermal inertia Hyperspectral imager, RFID surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors, IR detector Surface roughness Hyperspectral imager, LIDAR Dust environment characterization Imagers, optical camera, Langmuir Probe Surface mobility: granular flow, regolith movement, particle levitation Imagers, optical camera, RFID SAW sensors Particle size distribution Micro-imagers Particle properties: structure, texture, shape, thickness Visible imager Cohesion, friability, surface strength, compaction Penetrometer, imagers, load cell, physical interaction tool Mechanical properties of surface: compressive strength, tensile strength, shear strength, toughness, hardness Penetrometers, gages, specialized tests Albedo of particles Imagers, optical camera, IR detector Subsurface environment characterization: voids, clumps, mass concentrations, temperature, thermal inertia Penetrometers, micro-GPR, thermocouples  Conclusion: A review of past and current missions illustrates that surface investigations at asteroids are needed.  The planetary science community has expressed the need for robotic precursor missions to interact with and characterize the surface.  Technology development is needed for instrumentation to perform the desired science.  If we are to send astronauts to an asteroid in the coming decades, it is necessary now to begin development of in-situ instruments that can characterize the surface during robotic precursor missions and pave the way for human exploration.  References: [1] Durda, D. (2013) Laboratory Investigation of Asteroid Regolith Properties, EPSC. [2] Cheng, A. (2001) NEAR, APL. [3] Gudipati, M. (2009) Laboratory Studies for Planetary Sciences: PSDS White Paper. [4] Britt, D. (2011) Asteroids: Community White Paper to PSDS, 2011-2020. [5] Green, J. (2009-2013) SBAG Findings and NASA HQ Responses. [6] Lange, C. (2010) Baseline Design of MASCOT for the Hayabusa-2 mission, IPPW-7.  [7]  Burdick, A. (2013) Solar System Exploration: Asteroids, NASA.  [8] Ulamec, S. (2014) Pioneering Philae, ESA.  [9] Jaumann, R. (2013) MASCOT, LCPM-10 [10] Lauretta, D. (2013) OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and Payload, Univ. of Arizona.  [11] Abell, P. (2012) Humans to Near Earth Asteroids, NASA JSC.  [12] Binzel, R. (1993) Vol. 260 no. 5105 pp. 186-191, Science. 