 CHARACTERIZING THE HYDRATION ABSORPTION FEATURE ON CERES USING THE BOPPS INFRARED CAMERA   C. A. Hibbitts1, A. Cheng1, Ray Espiritu1, Eliot Young2, A. Rivkin1,  1Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20273, karl.hibbitts@jhuapl.edu; 2SouthWest Research Institute, Boulder, CO 80302.   Introduction. The Balloon Observation Platform for Planetary Science (BOPPS) mission observed 1Ceres during its one-day mission on September 26, 2014.   The observations of Ceres were secondary objectives designed to demonstrate the ability of the BIRC  (BOPPS InfraRed Camera) to detect and characterize the extent of hydration on airless bodies.  Hydrated asteroids are in part described by the presence of an infrared absorption band near 3-µm [e.g. 1], due to the presence of OH complexed onto materials in their surfaces.  This band could be expected to begin near 2.6 µm, with a minimum between 2.7 and 2.8 µm based on laboratory measurements of vacuum desiccated carbonaceous meteorites materials [2].  Although this measurement is obscured in ground-based observations by the presence of water vapor in our atmosphere, the BOPPS mission flew sufficiently high (~ 120K') that telluric water absorptions were not significant, enabling identification of hydration features on airless bodies and Ceres specifically.  The BIRC measurements were obtained with a cryogenic infrared camera equipped with a 9-position filter wheel with each infrared filter having a FWHM of ~ 3% of the center wavelength [2].  Five of these bands are selected to characterize the OH and H2O absorption feature, and are centered at 2.45 µm, 2.73 µm, 2.85 µm, 3.05 µm, and 3.2 µm.    The other four bands are at 0.67 µm (astronomical R-band), 4 µm, 4.27 µm, and 4.6 µm (these last three are to characterize CO2 features in comets or in surfaces of cold airless bodies). Science Goals.  The goal of this observation was to determine if the water-related infrared absorption feature had a reflectance minimum near 2.7 µm, which would be indicative of hydroxyl in a well-ordered structure or if the continuum monotonically dropped between 2.5 and 2.9 µm, in which case the OH may be associated with more random sites consistent with hydrated/hydroxylated poorly crystalline materials such as is commonly observed for hydroxyl in carbonaceous meteorites [2].  Observations.  The observations were made during evening dusk with the elevation of Ceres only 2o above the horizon, and an airmass of 16!  These observing conditions were due to priority observing of C/2013 A1 Siding Spring. The apparent magnitude of Ceres was 9.03 with a diameter of 0.397" (0.342 pixel fill).  Immediately after the Ceres observations, the platform slewed to the calibration star HD133772, a type A0V star, visible magnitude of 7.48 and imaged it with the same filters.  The observations of Ceres lasted only 15 minutes.  Approximately 150 images were taken at each filter position, with an exposure time of 246 msec.  This integration time was selected to be sufficiently short to avoid saturation (almost entirely due to the background) and so that the jitter and drift of the telescope pointing would be less than 1" during this time, maintaining the position of Ceres more or less constant.  This was a conservative decision. Postmission analyses demonstrated the stability of gondola was such that jitter and drift was commonly less than  NASA BOPPS gondola, telescope, and instrument payload during a 'hang test'.    The location and width of BIRC filters shown with respect to telescopic spectra of Ceres [1] and a laboratory spectrum of a meteorite.  1" for many seconds, with knowledge drift dominating the error [3,4] and the integration time could have been doubled without saturation.  Due to the large airmass, the background was high compared to signal, over a 1000DN compared to a signal of a few 10s of DN for all but the R-band.  Saturation occurs at about 2500DN. Procedures.  We have completed a preliminary analyses of the Ceres data [5] and are working to refine the calibration.  Two data processing lines are followed, allowing a comparison of the results for confirmation and verification.  The initial steps are identical.  Essentially the background is removed, images averaged, and the signal in 'Data Number' is converted to 'electrons'.  Because detector responsivity or gain (DN/e-) is signal dependent, analyses needed to be conducted beginning with electrons. Reflectance was then calculated using either 'Relative Photometry' or 'Absolute Photometry'.  For the relative photometric procedure, the signal in electrons from Ceres is divided by the signal in electrons from the standard star.  The ratio is then arbitrarily scaled to 1 at 2.45 µm.  A correction factor of 3.15 is calculated at R-band for the spectral difference between our Sun and the calibration star.  A Standard Thermal Model [6] was used to calculate and remove the thermal emission of Ceres, which somewhat contributed to the signal in the longest two filters.  For the absolute photometric method, radiance at each filter wavelength is derived using radiance information from the calibration star.  The Ceres radiance is then divided by the solar spectrum and again scaled to 1 at 2.45 µm.  The same STM model is applied to correct for thermal emission from Ceres.   Results.  Both data reduction procedures show Ceres to be 10-15% brighter than expected at R-band.  This may be due to the presence of scattered solar illumination.  There is no strong absorption band at 2.7 µm apparent with either calibration approach, but the reflectance at longer wavelengths is currently equivocal and inconsistent between the two techniques; the current hypothesis is that there is residual thermal self emission in the instrument that still needs to be accounted for.  In conclusion, currently, there is no evidence for a strong absorption feature in Ceres at 2.7 µm implying a lack of well-ordered hydroxylated minerals on its surface.    Acknowledgement: This work has been supported by NASA contract: NNN06AA01C.  References: References: [1] Rivkin et al., (2006), Icarus, 185, 563-567. [2] Takir et al., (2013), Meteor. & Planet. Sci., 48, 9, 1618-1637; [3] Cheng et al., (2014), P42A-04, Fall AGU; [4] Cheng et el., this LPSC, 2015. [5] Hibbitts et al., (2014) P23B-3988, Fall AGU. [6] Lebofsky et al., (1986), Icarus, 68:239-251.    Background-removed signal (DN) for Ceres in electrons.  Reflectance of Ceres calculated using the Relative and Absolute photometric approaches compared to a groundbased telescopic spectrum of Ceres. 