2969.PDF
A NEW CRETACEOUS-PALEOGENE IMPACT SEQUENCE IN SOUTH CAROLINA: AN ANALOG FOR LAMINATED SPHERULE DEPOSITS ON MARS.  R. S. Harris1, W. R. Doar, III2, S. J. Jaret3, E. T. Rasbury3, C. Fleisher4, 1Fernbank Science Center, Atlanta, GA 30307 (gageologist@gmail.com), 2South Carolina Geological Survey, Columbia, SC 29212,3Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, 4Department of Geology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602.     Introduction: A 10 cm section of clay capped by a 7 cm-thick spherule bed at the contact between uppermost Maastrichtian and lower Paleogene sediments exposed near Gaston, South Carolina marks the first discovery of the conformable Cretaceous-Paleogene section in the Atlantic Coastal Plain of Southeastern North America (Fig. 1). The sedimentary structures and sorting in the spherule bed strongly resemble many laminated "blueberry" beds observed by the Opportunity rover in the Meridiani region of Mars. Although the matrix of the spherules is not composed of iron oxide, they have been altered by diagenesis in a manner likely similar to the Martian case. Unlike the Martian examples, however, these spherules demonstrably are part of the impact boundary sequence. Therefore, the section provides an opportunity to assess those features uniquely related to the impact emplacement of the spherules and compare them to features derived from subsequent diagenesis. Impact Sequence and Evidence: The boundary clay unit can be divided into three parts. The lowermost five centimeters of gray kaolinite, with minor illite/smectite and lepidocrocite, lie above a sharp contact with white kaolinitic sands of the Sawdust Landing Formation. Rare millimeter-sized clay spherules are observed. The middle four centimeters is composed of dark brown, organic-rich kaolinite with minor amounts of illite/montmorillonite and greater concentrations of lepidocrocite and a trioctohedral smectite, characteristic of altered glass. This zone contains abundant carbon and preserves fossil leaves. The uppermost one centimeter consists chiefly of tan flint kaolin. The succession is broadly similar to other North American Cretaceous-Paleogene impact boundary sections.  The clay unit is capped by a razor-sharp contact along which a thin ferricrete has developed beneath a seven centimeter-thick orange, sandy, planar-laminated stratum composed of densely accumulated spherules (including doublets, triplets, and splash-form morphologies), typically one to five millimeters in diameter (Fig. 2). They exhibit accretionary textures and are composed primarily of very angular quartz sand in a matrix of woohouseite-svanbergite-goyazite (hydrous phosphates).  Rare rounded quartz grains contain one to four sets of planar deformation features (PDFs) (Fig. 3) or basal twin planes. Some spherules contain irregular patches of clay containing diverse assemblages of   Figure 1. Photograph of the upper portion of the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary impact sequence exposed in South Carolina. A seven centimeter-thick laminated bed of goyazite spherules (interpreted as diagenetic replacement of impact lapilli) caps the decimeter-thick clay section. Although the spherules are composed of hydrous phosphates rather than hematite, the sorting and sedimentary structures resemble many of the spherule deposits observed by Opportunity on Mars.        Figure 2. Photographs showing details of two spherules. Many spherules are "armored" by distinct rings, now altered largely to goyazite, that probably represent the original fine-grained shells of accretionary lapilli. Some spherules exhibit additional concentric rings. It is not clear whether those rings are part of the original accretionary fabric or if they represent diagenetic growths around the original spherule.    exotic inclusions , including thermally embayed quartz and feldspar, carbon-nickel bearing ilmenite, and a nickel-vanadium-rich almandine. The spherules also contain very-fine particles of nickel and iron-nickel phases that may have condensed from the impact vapor plume.  2969.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
 Figure 3. Cross-polarized light photomicrograph of a rounded quartz grain (oil immersion mount) found inside a goyazite spherule. The grain contains planar deformation features (PDFs) in at least three orientations that are typical of impact-shocked shocked quartz. Most of the spherules contain at least one shocked grain. The inset plane-polarized image shows a reoriented view of the same grain in order to demonstrate the distinct planarity of the PDFs.       Iridium Analyses: Iridium concentrations were measured by the Facility for Isotope Research and Student Training (FIRST) laboratory at Stony Brook University. 30 milligrams of rock powders were dissolved following standard silicate dissolution procedures (HF followed by Aqua Regia). Data were acquired on an Agilent Technologies 7500 quadrupole ICP-MS. Concentrations were determined via standard addition using stock Ir ICP solution. In addition to calibration to analytical standards, an "unknown" sample collected from the well-established Cretaceous-Paleogene impact horizon in Italy was measured. The result of 7 ppb iridium is consistent with the expected result.  The analyses reveal approximately 25 ppb iridium in the middle of the clay unit whereas the base of the spherule bed drops to approximately 7 ppb.  Implications:  The section exhibits all of the characteristics expected from a large-scale impact deposit. It also contains the well-define laminated bed 0f diagenetically altered accretionary impact spherules. Continued analysis may help distinguish impact spherule deposits on Mars from spherule deposits formed by other mechanisms.  Acknowledgements: We extend our appreciation to Fuller Walker of South Carolina Aggregates for access to important outcrops. We appreciate the field assistance of Jose R. Gil.   2969.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
