 Preserving Rock Cores for Mars Sample Return.  J. D. Kang, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona.  Introduction:  High gravity force shock testing for Mars-like rock core sample integrity research has been conducted at NASA/Caltech Jet Propulsion Laboratory beginning in January 2014. Testing simulates hard landing of rock cores contained in a sample cache as part of a proposed Sample Return Mission. Precise values an Earth Entry Vehicle (EEV) may experience are unknown. Current testing presumes 3,500 g-force as a value conservative enough for this preliminary study, providing a worst case scenario for sample return.  Rock core shock testing simulates the hard landing of the EEV upon return to Earth. Testing is needed to assess damage and survivability of samples collected during a proposed sample return mission. A 9-meter tall drop tower and a 100 lbs. aluminum alloy shock block is ultized to achieve the 3,500 g-forces needed to test shock. Prior to shock testing, Mars simulant rock cores are characterized using specialized core assessment metrics. Metrics collected include initial core mass, diameter, and length. Cores are also measured, recorded and archived after shock testing. During testing, core are placed in a shock block that is lifted to a height of 7 meters. At the calculated height needed to achieve 3,500 G-forces, the drop block is released, free falling onto corkboard located in the bottom of the drop tower test bed. The corkboard dampens the amount of shock without which, the cores would experience a sharp, sudden peak force, which would create a different shock environment than that expected from the EEV. Various headspace percentages were researched in order to determine if there was a correlation between the amount of headspace and the number of fractures created during shock testing. This headspace is located between the top of a rock core and the bottom of a sample tube. Other sealing strategies suggest using preload to compact the cores in the sample tubes or to include no headspace in the sample tubes, both of which could add complexity in practice. After testing 360 Mars simulant rock core samples, it was established that there is a linear correlation between the amount of ullage and the amount of fractures. Therefore, it is recommended that during the proposed MSR campaign the amount of headspace be very minimal. Results from the initial headspace testing raised a concern in container design. It became apparent after many headspace testing that the rock cores located in the inner two channels were experiencing the greatest amounts of fracturing after shock testing. As such, a new round of ullage testing was created to decipher whether the fractures were created by the headspace percentage located in that channel or the container design itself. During headspace testing, the various cores of differing headspace percentages were systematically rotated throughout the channels and run through shock testing. Post metrics from headspace position testing were compared to post metrics taken from headspace tested rock cores. Though there was a visible pattern between cores of the same headspace percentages, it was so minimal as to be considered noise. Thus it was determined that the channels were not the cause of the fracture patterns. The channel location does make a difference in the amount of fracturing that occurs during shock testing. Headspace position testing of 324 cores proved that channel position within the container does not affect the amount of fracturing that occurs. Though channels are not seen as the cause of the particular fracturing experienced by the cores during shock testing. Earlier testing did show that orientation and headspace percentage did contribute to total core recoverability. From headspace testing cores dropped in the horizontal orientation without headspace had a higher percentage of recoverable cores than either of either skew or horizontal orientations. On the other hand, the vertical orientation with headspace produced the most fractured cores. Thus, it can be assessed that headspace creates more fracturing than no headspace. However, it does not appear that headspace is particularly relevant to the fractures created in cores dropped in the horizontal orientation. Therefore, returning the Mars rock cores to Earth in a horizontal position with as little headspace as possible during the EEV high gravity force impact is highly recommended. Testing continues through 2015 with further results developing. 