2986.PDF
DIKE-RELATED FAULT MORPHOLOGY FROM GRABEN TOPOGRAPHY, SW THARSIS.  E. A. C. Boden and N. H. Dawers, Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, 70118, USA.    Introduction: Dike-induced faulting produces a topographic signature that has been determined from field and geodetic observations in volcanic rift zones on Earth [1, 2]. These studies identified the topographic signatures of surface deformation produced by lateral dike propagation in the near-surface region, normal fault propagation, and a combination of faulting and diking processes. Geodetic measurements and observed graben topography could only be produced by concurrent faulting and diking, thus the characteristic profile geometry of dike-related graben was established [1, 2].  Extensive systems of narrow closely-spaced graben emanate from the plains at the base of Arsia Mons, extending >2000 km into the ancient cratered terrain southwest of the Tharsis Volcanic Province, Mars. The characteristic dike-related graben geometry, first identified on Earth, was recognized in cross-sectional profiles of graben in Tharsis [3, 4, 5]. It has been suggested that the Tharsis radial graben are the surface expression of subsurface dike intrusions [3, 4, 5, 6]. Topographic profiles of dike-related graben in Tharsis have been further characterized to consist of concave downward flanks and a topographic maximum ~several kilometers from the graben rim [3, 4]. The observed surface deformation can be considered the sum of the displacement resulting from faulting and from diking [1, 2, 3].  We construct cross-sectional and along-strike displacement profiles for en échelon and hard-linked graben segments to quantify the relative proportions of dike-related versus non-dike-related fault topography. We then discuss potential implications of the relative spatial distributions as they relate to features identified in digital imagery and aspects of the along-strike displacement profiles. Data and Methods: CTX digital imagery was used for fault mapping and elevation measurements were obtained from MOLA PEDR point data. A locally interpolated kringing map was produced using ArcGIS software for the purpose of profile extraction. To minimize error introduced by interpolation, topographic profiles were measured along MOLA PEDR orbital track lines oriented roughly normal to strike.  Cross-sectional profiles, derived from MOLA topography, depict the graben geometry at intervals along the length (L) of the fault. We employ our experience analyzing fault topography using MOLA profiles in the manual identification of critical points from each cross-section, the maximum (flank) and minimum (floor) elevations for both of the graben boundary faults. Vertical displacement or throw (D) is calculated, for each graben flank, as the difference in elevation between the graben flank and floor. D values are plotted relative to distance L, for each segment, creating an along-strike displacement profile that exposes variations in the magnitude and gradient of D. The D/L profile is a valuable tool that reveals throw anomalies and trends, facilitating the visualization of such patterns over the length of the fault, while preserving the spatial distribution of the cross-sections from which the throw measurements were derived. Results: Along-strike D/L profiles provide information about segment morphology within the context of the fault system as a whole. D/L profiles for Segments 1-3 (Fig. 1) illustrate the interaction between the segments and provide insights into the morphology of each segment individually. The shaded background in the figure shows the summed displacements for all segments that intersect the profile line at the same distance along the fault trace. Each segment (1-3) is composed of hard-linked segments of shorter length, this is indicated by peaks and troughs along strike, where throw minima correspond to locations of a breached relay ramp [7]. Such locations may be identified in the CTX digital imagery by the presence of a remnant 2986.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
paleotip, where the tip of one segment has become inactive after the segments coalesce into a longer mechanically-linked fault [8]. Along strike profiles display anomalously low displacement values where tip zones of adjacent segments overlap. The interaction between graben segments arranged en échelon and the presence of abandoned paleotips indicate that graben bounding fault systems grow along strike by segment linkage, similar to faults on Earth [8]. The spatial correlation between throw minima and paleotips suggests that fault growth by segment linkage is responsible for local anomalies in D magnitude.  Most of the topographic cross sections from the graben analyzed are consistent with the proposed characteristic dike-related geometry, however the segments exhibit variations in flank concavity and throw magnitude along strik (Fig.1). Cross-sectional profiles reveal that the interacting tip regions of en échelon segments exhibit fault controlled (concave upward) profile geometry (Fig. 2). These profiles also show low displacement on the outer flank of each segment, whereas the inner flanks both exhibit higher displacement. This result emphasizes the influence of faulting on the postdiking topography, because the stress concentration between the interacting tips is expected to increase as the tips continue to propagate and their stress shadows converge. To quantitatively examine the relative proportions of dike-controlled versus fault-controlled topography, the footwall geometry of each graben flank was classified as either concave downward or upward. A total of 22, 19, and 13 cross sectional profiles were measured for Segments 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Concavity was assessed individually for the two graben flanks depicted in each cross-section. The number of graben flanks per segment that exhibit a concave downward geometry, divided by the total number of flanks for that segment, yields 0.75, 0.79, and 0.65, the proportion of concave downward flanks for Segment 1, 2 and 3, respectively.  Fault controlled processes are evident in the CTX digital imagery and through correlation with displacement minima or paleotips, in addition to the presence of concave-upward, normal faulting, topography from cross-sectional profiles. The spatial correlations of throw anomalies to mechanically interacting segments may be complimented by the distinct fault-controlled features identifiable from the CTX digital imagery, such as en échelon segment tips, paleotips, or collapse pits. With observed features of fault propagation and interaction, taken into consideration, the proportions of concave downward flank geometries increase to 0.89, 0.89, and 0.88 for Segments 1, 2, and 3 respectively.  The preferential concentration of concave upward topography near segment tips and around remnant paleotips suggests that fault propagation that occurred post-diking is identifiable from graben topography. The implication of faulting that postdates the graben forming intrusion(s) is that the observed topography may represent a later stage of graben evolution and that dike-induced graben geometry may be obscured by subsequent fault topography. This observation predicts that the proportion of graben topography that exhibits the characteristic concave downward dike-related geometry should decrease relative to the concave upward fault-controlled geometry, as time progresses.  References: [1] Rubin, A.M. and Pollard, D.D. (1988) Geology 16, 413-417. [2] Rubin, A.M. (1992) J. Geophys. Res. 97, 1839-1958. [3] Schultz, R.A. et al. (2004) Geology 32, 889-892. [4] Goudy, C.L. and Schultz, R.A. (2005) Geophys. Res. Lett. 32, L05201. [5] Wilson, L. and Head, J.W. (2002) J. Geophys. Res. 107, 5057. [6] Mège, D. and Masson, P. (1996) Planet. Space Sci. 44, 1499-1546. [7] Dawers, N.H. and Anders, M.H. (1995) J. Struct. Geol. 17, 607-614. [8] Vetterlein, J. and Roberts, G.P. (2010)  J. Struct. Geol. 32, 394–406.  2986.pdf
46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
