 Modeling the Evolution of the Sphere-Restricted Full Three-Body Problem. Travis S. J. Gabriel1 and Daniel J. Scheeres1,  1Department  of  Aerospace  Engineering,  University  of  Colorado  Boulder,  CO  80309,  Travis.Gabriel@colorado.edu,  Scheeres@colorado.edu. Introduction:   In  Scheeres  (2014)  the Sphere-Restricted Full Three-Body Problem (RF3BP) is  outlined  as  a  particular  aspect  of  a  problem  set regarding  full-body dynamical  systems [1].  Full-body problems host particles of finite density,  disallowing them  to  come infinitely  close to  one  another  as  in classical dynamics. By allowing for the  dissipation of energy  in  the  system,  a  discrete  set  of  equilibrium states  can  be  achieved  -  all  of which  are  listed  in Figure  1.  By  applying  friction  and  restitution, potential relative equilibria will include resting states where  relative  motion  between  objects  is  zero.  The solution  space has  been described in  terms  of stable and  unstable  states  assuming  spheres  of  uniform density and mass [2]. Using  perfectly-rigid  dynamics,  we  simulate systems  with  a  given  angular  momentum  in  a purpose-written  C-based  code.  This  investigation explores  various  restitution  and  friction  coefficients for  given  initial  angular  momentum.  We  aim  to describe  the  relative  mechanics  and  dynamics  in rubble-pile bodies where relative forces are not great enough to compromise the rigidity of the constituents. All  output is analyzed in  terms of normalized units,  with  the  gravitational  parameter  and  the  minimum distance between the equal spheres as unity. Computation:  A  C-based  Discrete  Element Method (DEM) code has been developed for the study of  full-body  dynamical  systems.  The  code  resolves perfectly rigid-body interaction between spheres with surface friction  and  of various densities and  masses. Impact  mechanics  are  dictated  by  restitution  and friction.  Such  a  formulation  is  subject  to  inelastic collapse in the case of a less-than-unity coefficient of restitution, where an infinite number of impacts occur in  a  finite  time,  i.e.  dissipation  results  in  relative velocities tending to zero, requiring the timestep to do the  same  in  order  to  resolve  the  interaction.  We implement  a  variable  coefficient  of  restitution  for cases  of  negligible  relative  velocity to  mitigate  this issue  -  applying  a  unity  restitution  condition.  In  a strict  sense,  this  generates  resting  solutions  that should be described as 'pseudo-resting' since persistent contact  is  not  explicitly  handled.  Numerically resolving  persistent  contact  requires  the employment of soft-body mechanics,  whose contact  interaction  is usually modeled by spring  dampeners;  however,  this method also encounters inelastic collapse in the limit of  perfectly  rigid  objects,  an  assumption  that  is intrinsic  to   the  full-body  problem  formulation  in Scheeres (2012). Euler-Cromer  integration  is  compared  to  that  of Velocity-Verlet integration for the case of the RF3BP. We  confirm that energy and angular  momentum  are conserved to within the limits commonly accepted in the computational granular physics community. Initial Conditions. Each of the three equal spheres is placed in  either  an  Euler  (aligned) or Lagrangian  (equilateral  triangle)  non-resting  configuration,  with some global circular velocity about the barycenter. To eliminate the possibility of an early dense interaction (two simultaneous contacts) the initial configuration is negligibly and non-uniformly perturbed. Results:  We  find  that  the  mechanism  of dissipation  can  have a significant  effect on the final equilibrium configuration of the RF3BP and the time in  which  this  state  is  achieved.  It  is  reasonable  to suspect that  this result  extends to the Restricted Full N-Body  Problem.  The  existence  of  two  possible equilibrium  configurations  for  a  given  angular  momentum  in  the  RF3BP  is  found  analytically  in previous work [1]. The DEM simulation environment developed herein  affords the opportunity to examine the evolution of a full-body system in the context of a strictly  defined  dynamical  problem  near  areas  of mixed  solutions.  This  precursor  study  is  part  of  a larger  fundamental  effort  to  outline  the  dynamical pathways that  restricted full-body configurations will trace in  phase space given various initial  conditions and models of dissipation. Additionally, we aim to use these results as an analogy for rubble-pile solar system bodies in  an  attempt  to describe their  past,  present, and future dynamical-mechanical states.  Figure 1: Table of equilibria for the RF3BP [2]. Figure 2:  Relative equilibria  chart  of the RF3BP with  normalized  energy  and  angular  momentum squared  in  the  vertical  and  horizontal  axis, respectively [2]. References: [1]  Scheeres  (2012)  Celestial Mechanics  and  Dynamical  Astronomy,  113,  3, 291-320.  [2] Scheeres  (2014)  Complex  Planetary Systems, Proceedings IAU Symposium, 310. 