 EVALUATION OF VIRTIS EMISSIVITY ANOMALIES USING CROSS-CUTTING RELATIONSHIPS IN THE VICINITY OF MIELIKKI MONS, VENUS. Sarah C. Davey, Richard E. Ernst, Claire Samson, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1S 5B6, sarah.davey@carleton.ca  Introduction: The payload VIRTIS (Visual and Infrared Thermal Imaging Spectrometer) was installed on the Venus Express spacecraft (2005 - 2014) to address key questions regarding the status of Venus' tectonic regime, past resurfacing events, and whether Venus is volcanically active. Covering the southern hemisphere of Venus, VIRTIS data can distinguish compositional variation due to surface weathering based on spectral emissivity, as it is capable of penetrating Venus' thick atmosphere at a wavelength of ~1 µm [1]. Initial interpretations of VIRTIS data were focused on hotspots recognized by previous mapping campaigns including Idunn Mons in Imdr Regio, Innini and Hathes Mons in Dione Regio, and Mielikki Mons in Themis Regio [14]. In each instance, high emissivity anomalies are associated with lava flows centered on top or on the flanks of volcanic rises. These flows were interpreted to be basaltic in composition and the youngest (~250 Ka) stratigraphic units within their respective areas [1].   With important implications relating to Venus' tectonic processes, core and mantle evolution, corroboration of these data are imperative. Interpretation of Magellan synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images allows for an independent assessment of the volcanic and magmatic activity on Venus. Radiating grabenfissure systems (RGFS) are abundant volcano-tectonic features present on Venus' surface [5,6]. Sourced from a central magmatic body, graben and fissures are formed by extensional stresses related to the emplacement of underlying laterally propagating dykes. RGFS are commonly focused on mons and coronae and can extend thousands of kilometers from their inferred centers. Their abundance and spatial extent mean that interaction with volcanic features such as flows and/or other RGFS is quite common. Their resulting crosscutting relationships can be utilized for relative chronology [e.g. 7].   Here, we discuss the relative chronology of the high emissivity anomaly related to Mielikki Mons (Themis Regio) and its distant neighbour Yunya-mana Mons (Phoebe Regio) (Fig. 1). The area discussed spans from 15° to 30° S and 280° to 290° E and therefore includes the southern portion of Phoebe Regio in addition to the northern portion of Themis Regio. Themis Regio (V-53) quadrangle and Mielikki Mons: Themis Regio is situated on a broad topographic rise interpreted to be underlain by a mantle plume [8]. A significant portion of Themis Regio is covered by the southernmost extension of Parga Chasmata and related flows. Located at the northern boundary of Themis Regio, Mielikki Mons is situated outside of the main Parga Chasmata rift zone. Based on mapping by [9], the lobate flows emanating from Mielikki Mons cover an area of ~375,000 km2.  A RGFS limited to a few hundred kilometers also extends from the center of Mielikki Mons. The high emissivity anomalies identified and discussed by [1] on Mielikki Mons are linked to the lava flows on the eastern flank of the volcano (Fig. 2a).   Figure 1. Lava flows and radiating graben-fissure systems of Mielikki Mons (red) and Yunya-mana Mons (blue) [8,9,10,11]. The black box marks the extent of VIRTIS data discussed in [1] and shown in figure 2. Phoebe Regio (V-41) quadrangle and Yunya-mana Mons Area: Phoebe Regio is characterized by a 1.5 to 2.5 km long topographically positive tessera belt covering approximately 9% of the quadrangle [10]. Deva na Chasma, locally named Pinga Chasmata, cuts through southern Phoebe Regio, and it is within this local rift zone that Yunya-mana Mons arises as the broadest and highest topographic feature in the quadrangle.  An extensive RGFS centered on Yunya-mana Mons spans south for 1,100 km reaching flows associated with Mielikki Mons. The contemporaneous flows from Yunya-mana Mons cover an areal extent of 220,000 km2; equivalent to just 60% of the flows surrounding Mielikki Mons. Cross-cutting relationship: The mapping presented here shows a simple cross-cutting relationship between high emissivity flows emanating from Mielikki Mons and graben radiating from Yunya-mana Mons (Fig. 2). This cross-cutting relationship indicates that the flows emanating from Mielikki Mons are older than the graben associated with the Yunya-mana Mons system. Given that the flows originating from Yunya-mana Mons are either younger than or contemporaneous with the Yunya-mana Mons graben-fissure system, the lobate flows of the Mielikki Mons system are therefore older than those associated with Yunya-mana Mons.  Implications: The cross-cutting relationship demonstrated here adds to the story of Mielikki Mons described by [1]; where lobate lava flows of Mielikki Mons are young (less than 250 Ka). Herein we show that those surrounding Yunya-mana Mons are even younger. In the absence of publically available VIRTIS data (beyond [1]), the spectral emissivity of flows emanating from Yunya-mana Mons remain a mystery. A high emissivity signature would be reasonable and consistent with the morphology and relative age of Yunya-mana Mons with respect to Mielikki Mons. On the other hand, if the lava flows of Yunya-mana Mons exhibit a low emissivity signature then this would raise further questions.   A stratigraphically young low emissivity lobate flow would require careful consideration. While the flows emanating from Yunya-mana Mons are examples of what would classically be identified as basalt on the basis of their morphology, a low emissivity signature is indicative of an absence of ferrous iron. Because ferrous iron is typically attributed to the presence of olivine or pyroxene, a basaltic chemistry for low emissivity flows, at least at the surface, cannot be easily surmised [1,12,13]. Drawing from the discussions and conclusions in [12], there are several factors that may influence the character of low emissivity flows such as an intermediate or felsic chemistry, textural influences such as porosity (vesicles?), or differential weathering as Yunya-mana Mons stands at a higher elevation compared to Mielikki Mons [13]. Regardless of these possibilities, the cross-cutting relationship between lava flows of Mielikki Mons and graben of Yunya-mana Mons indicate there is volcanic activity even younger than those identified by [1]. References: [1] Smrekar, S.E., et al. (2010) Science, 328, 605. [2] McGill, G.E., et al. (1981) Geophys. Res. Lett. 8, 737. [3] Phillips, R.J., et al. (1984) Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.12, 411. [4] Stofan, E.R., et al. (1995) J. Geophys. Res. 23, 317. [5] Grosfils, E.B. & Head, J. (1994) Geophys. Res. Lett. 21, 701 [6] Ernst, R.E., et al. (2003) Icarus 164, 282 [7] Studd, D. et al., (2010) Icarus 215, 279 [8] Stofan, E.R. & Brian, A.W. (2012) U.S. Geol. Surv. Geol. Invest. Ser., Map 3165. [9] Ivanov, M. A. & Head, J. W. (2004) U.S. Geol. Surv. Geol. Invest. Ser., Map I-2792. [10] Senske, D.A. (1999) LPSC 30, 1671. [11] Davey, S.C., et al. (2012) Carleton Univ. M.Sc. Thesis. [12] Gilmore. M.S., et al. (2015) Icarus 254, 350. [13] Johnson, N.M., & Fegley, B. (2002) Adv. Space Res. 29, 233.  Figure 2. (a) VIRTIS data from [1]. High emissivity indicated by shades of red and low emissivity grade towards blue. Radiating graben-fissure systems from Mielikki Mons (red) and Yunya-mana Mons (blue). The black box marks the area shown in 2b and 2c. (b) Graben from Yunya-mana Mons cross-cutting lava flows associated with the Mielikki Mons high emissivity anomaly overlain on Magellan SAR image. (c) Original Magellan SAR image without interpretation. 