1027.PDF
COMPRESSION DYNAMICS OF THE PROTO-STELLAR COULD AND DESITY PROFILES OF THE PROTOPLANETARY PASSIVE DISKS.  T. R. Abdulmyanov, Kazan State Power Engineering University, Kazan, Russia (abdulmyanov.tagir@yandex.ru).  Introduction: Compression (collapse) dynamics of the proto-stellar cloud was first investigated in 1964 by the Japanese astrophysicists C. Hayashi and T. Nakano. The performed calculations of these scientists show that in a few years from the beginning of a cloud adiabatic compression a hydrostatic equilibrium core is formed. The difference in density of the proto-star and the surface of the proto-planetary disk will be created on the surface of the proto-planetary disk regular periodic perturbations. Such perturbations of the surface of the proto-planetary disk are the most interesting in the study of the mechanism of formation of proto-planetary rings.To solve the problem of primary it is necessary to the formation of the protoplanetary disk was considered in connection with the process of star formation. For this case, the acceleration component δFg + δFP, associated with the condition of the gravitational instability, will be a significant of the formation of proto-planetary disks . To determine the effect of component δFg + δFP, in this paper we consider the wave equation and the corresponding initial and boundary conditions. With the solutions of this equation, a formula for calculating the density profiles of protoplanetary disks was obtained. Formula density is used to analyze the structure of protoplanetary disks. It is shown that the action of density waves is still in the early stages of the evolution of the protoplanetary disk could be the reason for the separation of the protoplanetary disk into concentric rings (protoplanetary rings).  Surface wave disturbance of the proto-planetary disk:  The most intensive movement of the waves could be even in the early stages of formation of the proto-planetary disk. Wave motion of gas and dust particles are formed mainly by the action of two forces [3]: by the gravitational force δFg = 4πGρ0u, related to a change δρ density ρ = ρ0 + δρ and by the gas pressure δFP: ,1222xucxPF sP  where u(x) – the displacement of dust particles as a result of the forces δFg and δFP, cs – the speed of sound. The equation of wave motion of gas and dust particles in the case u(x,y) will be the following: .411022222222uGurrurructus  (1)  The solution of eq. (1) is ),()()(),,(0 0rRtTtru kkk    (2) where Φν(φ) = cos(νφ + φ0), Rkν(r) = Jν(λkνr/R0), Jν – the Bessel function of order ν, λkν – zeros of the Bessel function Jν; R0 – radius of the proto-planetary disk, φ0 – the arbitrary constant, akν,  bkν – the coefficients determined by the initial conditions for the equation (1). If the value of the constant λ = [4πGρ0 – (λkν /R0)2] > 0, then the function T will be equal Tkν (t) = akνexp(csλ1/2) + bkνexp(–csλ1/2). If the value of the constant λ ≤ 0, then Tkν (t) = akνcos[cs (–λ)1/2] + bkνsin[cs (–λ)1/2]. The density of the disks:  In the perpendicular to the drive direction of the balance in the disk supported by the pressure gradient dP/dz = ρZ, where Z – acceleration of gravity in the direction z, P – total pressure in the disk, an equal amount of radiation pressure, and a gas pressure, which is determined from the equation of state of ideal gas [3]. For vertical insulated passive disk is a good approximation of the equation of state P = ρ 2sс  where cs –  the speed of sound. Substituting this expression for the pressure P in the equation for the pressure gradient, we obtain 2sс dρ/dz = ρZ. The solution (2) of the boundary value problem for the wave equation (1) is a function of the vertical displacement. This the help differentiating this function, we obtain the following expression for the acceleration Z = ∂2u/∂2t. Then the equation for the pressure gradient takes the following form: – 2sс dρ/du = ρ∂2u/∂2t. After the separating the variables and integrating, we obtain: cutcdutucs  22222221ln , where c - any constant. Then the expression for the density of the disk can be presented as follows:  ctuutuctrs22221exp),( . (3) From (3) we obtain the following expression relating the radius of the protostar cloud r, and the radius of the protoplanetary disk R0: .5072.0420012.020204/33020   RrrRGRss This equation shows that the radius of the protoplanetary disk of radius R0 depends on the protostar cloud r. Fig. 1 is a graph of radius R0 (vertical axis) from r (horizontal axis) obtained by one of the two solutions of the equation with respect to R0. 1027.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
According to Fig. 1 at first protostar cloud compression decreases rapidly the disk radius R0. Starting with a 60 AU and to zero dependence R0 on r is almost linear.  Fig. 1. Compression protostar cloud: graph of R0(r) (vertical axis) as a function of radius r protostellar cloud (horizontal axis).  The density profiles of the disks:  Taking into account  the dependence R0(r), in the further calculations we assume that a basic parameter of the protoplanetary disk is the radius R0. Assuming that initially the compression protostar cloud radius R0 of the protoplanetary disk was equal to 100 AU, at the end of compression – 0.3 AU, with the help of formula (3) we have calculated the density profiles of the protoplanetary disk. According to the theory Hayashi  the initial radius of the protoplanetary disk of the solar system was R0 = 5 AU. According to Fig. 2a - 2c the desity of the disks will have a minima bitwin which is a distance D obout 10 AU. That is D = 2· R0.    In 2008, by a group of astronomers from the Max Planck Institute, near the star TW Hydrae b was discovered planet formed within the dust disc. A more detailed picture of the dust disk was obtained in 2013 using the Hubble Space Telescope. The observations and analysis of the observations [1 – 2] show that the protoplanetary disk can be separated into concentric rings (protoplanetary rings).   Fig. 2. The density ρ(r) (vertical axis) profiles for R0 = 5 AU and 1 ≤ r ≤ 40 AU(horizontal axis): a) t·τk = 1; b) t·τk = 2; c) t·τk = 5 (rad.).  Conclusions: The simulation results show that the main reason for the formation of density waves on the surface of the protoplanetary disk is a compression of protostellar clouitds (collapse). Using the solution of the wave equation (1) and the solution of the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium we have obtained the formula of density of the protoplanetary disks. This formula can be used to analyze the structure of protoplanetary disks. It is shown that the action of density waves is still in the early stages of the evolution of the protoplanetary disk could be the reason for the separation of the protoplanetary disk into concentric annular pieces (protoplanetary rings). References: [1] Sauter J., Wolf S. (2011) Astronomy and Astrophysics., 527, 1 – 13. [2] Wolf S.(2008) Astrophys. Space Sci., 313,  109 – 112. [3] Safronov, V.  S. Evolution of the proto-planetary cloud and formation of the Earth and other planets, English translation NASA TT F-677, 1972.  1027.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
