1035.PDF
TUNING OF LUNAR REGOLITH THERMAL INSULATION PROPERTIES UTILIZING REACTIVE CONNSOLIDATION BY ACTIVATED THERMITES.  M.A. Hobosyan1 and K. S. Martirosyan2, Department of Physics, University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville . Edinburg . Harlingen, 1 W University Blvd, Brownsville, Texas 78520, (1Mkhitar.Hobosyan@utrgv.edu, 2Karen.Martirosyan@utrgv.edu).   Introduction:  The Moon is remining one of the most important outposts when considering long term missions ultimately reaching Mars, asteroids, and beyond. The establishment of permament lunar base is imperative for successful exploration of the space. The artificial structures on the lunar surface should protect the equipment and personnel from harmful UV radiation and extreme temperature changes during long term expeditions. For artificial structures, lunar regolith is the main construction material on the moon. However, the regolith on the lunar surface is mostly composed of small eroded particles called lunar dust. There are several approaches how to consolidate the lunar dust to shape brick-type construction elements. The thermalinsulation properties of the consolidated regolith is highly important. Thus, the utilization of activated thermite method to consolidate the luinar dust is very attractive [1, 2]. In this method, the regolith consolidation, under vacuum environment, can be performed using activated thermite reactions where the aluminum or magnesium are used with small (less than 2 wt. %) amounts of Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) as an activator agent. The thermite reactions activated by PTFE possess sufficient exothermicity to perform rapid consolidation under vacuum with utilization of more than 80 wt. % regolith [1]. The PTFE plays a dual role. It not only increases the exothermicity of the system by assisting the main thermite reaction, but also contributes to the porosity of the product. Higher PTFE amounts with up to 7 wt. % can generate consolidated product with up to 60 % porosity [2].  In this work, we examine the possibility to produce lunar constraction materials by the Regolith-Mg-PTFE system. The thermodynamic calculations as well as the dependence of thermal insulation properties on the porosity of consolidated product were studied. We estimated the thermal conductivity dependence on temperature in the range of 1.9-400 K, which includes a typical lunar day-night cycle.     Thermodynamic calculation and estimation of the systems regolith-magnesiumum-activator: We have used the JSC-1A lunar soil simulant in our experiments [3]. The thermodynamic calculations were performed for the following system (1.26SiO2+0.19Al2O3+0.03Fe2O3+0.13FeO+0.23CaO+0.28MgO)+nMg, where n is the stoichiometric coefficient matching the moles of Mg added to initial regolith powder. According to thermodynamic calculations (Fig. 1) at the magnesium content of 7-8 wt % in the initial mixture the adiabatic temperature estimated to be 1690 K, which is at the same level as it was for the system regolith-Aluminum with Al content of 22 wt % [1].   Fig. 1. Thermodynamic calculations of the system (1).  The adiabatic temperature stays constant up to 35 wt % Mg addition, and then increases by 50 K reaching to maximum of 1735 K at the Mg content 52 wt. %. We are interested in the region less than 20 wt. % where adiabatic temperature is about 1700 K. Thus, although the system containing 10 wt % Mg has significantly high adiabatic temperature, however, it is difficult to generate self-sustaining combustion at this concentration. For the purpose of increasing the combustion temperature and introducing some gaseous agents to increase the porosity of the product, we add PTFE, into the system. It was revealed that in the system of Regolith with 15 wt % Mg addition of 3 wt % PTFE is increasing the reaction temperature up to 1800 K. PTFE produces numerous gaseous substances which helps to create product with controllable porosity and thermal insulation properties.  Results and Discussion: The details of experimental setup and procedure are presented elsewhere [2]. We are interested to identify the minimum amounts of PTFE that can be used with smallest concentration of the metal in initial mixture. The minimum concentration of PTFE when the system still has combustion ability was 1.5 wt. % for the system containing 15 wt. % Mg. The SEM image of this product is demonstrated in Fig. 2a. We observe minimal porosity of (30 % by volume) with disconnected pores of 2-5 m diameter. The system generates higher combustion temperature with increasing concentration of PTFE, which was also predicted by thermodynamic calculations. The combustion temperature is 1320 °C for the 1035.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
system containing 7 wt % PTFE. The porosity, Knoop hardness and combustion velocity values are also increaseing when we increase the PTFE ratio used in the system. The Fig. 2b demonstrates a typical SEM of product received using 7 wt. % PTFE, where the pores are inter-connected with sizes in range of 20-60 µm.          Fig. 2. a) SEM of sintered regolith at 15 wt % Mg with 1.5 wt % PTFE, (b) higher magnification SEM of the same system demonstrating isolated pores   The EDX mapping of the product shows that the elemental composition is mostly uniform throughout the sample. Fig. 3a-d represent the mapping of Mg, O, Si and Al, respectively. The dark areas represent the pores where the elements are absent. There was no fluorine detected by EDX, indicating that all the gaseous compounds containing fluorine are leaving the system during the high temperature reaction.                Fig. 3. EDX mapping of the combustion product for Regolith-15 wt. % Mg- 7 wt. % PTFE system for a)Mg, b) O, c) Al and d) Si atoms. The thermal conductivity measurements were conducted by PPMS (Ever Cool II, Quantum Design) over the temperature range 1.9 - 400 K, under vacuum (10-9 Torr). As expected, the sintered regolith has a higher thermal conductivity coefficient than pure regolith due to bonding between particles. Thermal conductivity values for highly porous (>60 % pores per volume with ~7 wt. % PTFE) samples were in the range of 0.1-1 W/(mK) whereas for denser samples (~45 % pores per volume, obtained from initial mixtures containing ~1.5 wt. % PTFE) the values of thermal conductivity were in the range 2-4 W/(mK). For comparison, JSC-1A thermal conductivity is 2-2.5 W/mK.  To reveal the thermal insulation properties of the consolidated products over the wide range of temperature (as expected for the moon environment) we examined the thermal conductivity in the temperature range of 1.9 K to 400 K under vacuum. The peak temperature on the moon during day is 400 K and during nights can reach 100 K. At the lunar poles there are regions which do not receive direct sunlight and are thermally equilibrated only with the thermal background radiation of deep space at 2-3 K.  Figure 4 demonstrates the thermal conductivity change for the sample produced from the consolidation of the regolith mixture containing 15 wt.% Mg and 3 wt. % PTFE. Thermal conductivity decreases from 0.5 W/m.K at 400 K to 0.002 W/m.K at the 1.9 K, with 0.45 W/m.K value at 300 K. A sharp decline is observed below 100 K, where the thermal conductivity was 0.33 W/m.K.            Fig. 4. Dependence of thermal conductivity measurements versus temperature from 1.9 K to 400 K for product received from Regolith-15 wt. % Mg-3wt. % PTFE system It is important to point out that as temperature decreases, the thermal insulation properties of consolidated regolith improve, which is beneficial for the construction purposes. Additionally, when temperatures increase from 300 K to 400 K (the peak temperature on the moon) the thermal conductivity coefficient changes by about 10 %, thus maintaining good insulation properties for the sintered regolith. Acknowledgment We wish to acknowledge the financial support of this research by the Department of Defense (W911NF15-1-0065). References: [1] Hobosyan M.A., Martirosyan K.S. (2012). "Sintering of Regolith by Activated Thermites: A Novel Approach for Lunar in situ Resource Utilization." Lunar Planet. Sci., 43: 1019. [2] Hobosyan, M. A., and Martirosyan K. S., "Consolidation of Lunar Regolith Simulant by Activated Thermite Reactions." Journal of Aerospace Engineering (2014). [3] McKay D.C. et al, JSC-1: A New Lunar Soil Simulant, Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 1994; 857-866  a b a b c d 1035.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
