1055.PDF
THE GEOLOGY OF THE LACUSTRINE TRAMPEADERO FORMATION, WITH APPLICATION TOTHE MSL LANDING SITE, MARS  J. W. Nußbaumer, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, GermanyIntroduction: Lacustrine sediments have beenfound at the MSL landing site in Gale crater, Mars. Fora better understanding of the rocks at this landing site,the following analysis of lacustrine sediments is presented. Within the scope of this work, an area of 17sqkm was mapped in a scale of 1 : 15000. The area islocated in the northwestern part of Argentina, northeastof La Rioja, and southwest of Catamarca. It is is situated in the sierras pampeanas, which forms a morpho-structural unit with metamorphic and magmaticbasement. In the mapped area, proterozoic rocks of themetamorphic basement are migmatits with intrusions oforthogneisses. Cambric? metamorphic rocks of the LaCébila Formation represent clastic sediments of pelliticand psammitic origin. The upper-carbonic lacustrinesediments of the Trampeadero Formation (TF, see Fig.1) are part of the Paganzo-basin and mainly examinedin this work. These lake sediments were deposited in atectonic graben-structure, between migmatits in theeast and Cébila formation in the west. They passed during the sedimentation a glacial phase, beginning withhumid climates, then glacial conditions, ending withtransgression because of increasing temperatures. Adelta moving from the northwest to the southeast andsynsedimentary slumping structures in warve-like layers refer to a hydrologically open glacial lake withsteep margins. Quaternary units are fanglomerats,younger and older Quarternary. Geographical location: The mapping area is located in northwestern Argentina, about 150 km northeast of La Rioja and 150 km southwest of Catamarca inthe Sierra Ambato, at 28 ° 45 south and 66 ° 21' west.Cartographic basis was a grayscale aerial image with ascale of 1: 50,000. The settlements Mazan and VillaMazan with about 2000 inhabitants is about 25 kmwest from the work area in the valley known for its hotsprings. The deepest point of the territory is located at1250 m and the highest at about 1500 m. The surrounding mountains are about 3000 m high. The local animals are condors and parrot species, as well as theblack-yellow-red striped coral snake (micrurus) and atarantula species, which can reach a size of about 20cm. Desert foxes, pumas and lamas are also part of thelocal fauna.Previous work: One of the first works about thearea is from [1]. He describes the antimon mineral deposits southwest of the territory. [2] wrote a generalstudy about the area. Then [3] performed a study wherehe put the sediments of Trampeadero-Formation in theTertiary. [4] examined the crystalline basement, the upper carboniferous - sediments and the petrography ofthe rocks. Because of the discovery of microflora in theneopaleozoic outcrops, the sequence was determined acarboniferous unit. [5] described the migmatites andthe La Cébila Formation and analyzed their structuralcharacter. [6] developed a facies model in the northand identified two mega sequences with a transgressivecharacter, and a basal regressive section. Further studies about the micro - and macrofauna were performed.[7] examined the biostratigraphy based on the microfossils and associated the individual facies to certainenergy levels, thus forming a water-level model.Surrounding Geology: The mapped area forms anextensional Horst - Graben - structure. In this rift valley were lacustrine continental sediments (sandstonesand arkose) deposited from the adjacent areas. In theeastern part of the mapped area is an open metamorphic basement with migmatits and orthogneisses. In thewestern part are metamorphic pelitic rocks and thepsammitic formation La Cébila. The diagenetic solidified sediments of the Trampeadero formation are partof the northeastern Paganzo group. The Paganzo basinconsists of glaciolacustrine and glaciomarine formations. Within the lake sediments, the TF forms a postcarbonic saddle structure. Since one of the greaterglaciations in the permo-carboniferous gondwana continent took place in the area, the TF was probably aglacial lake [8] [9] and was formed in a rift valley withsteep banks and great depths.Stratigraphy of the Formation Trampeadero:The lacustrine sediments are unconformably above theFormation La Cébila and the basal sector of Grupo Paganzo. Through discoveries of fossil flora as Gingkophyl, Cordaites riojanus and Gondwanidium sp., thesesediments are part of the upper carboniferous (Westphal-Stephan) [9] [10]. After [11] dominatesCristatisporites spp. with a small percentage of pollen.The TF is about 274 m thick [7]. The continental sediments show low diagenetic solidification. The formerlake represents a siliciclastic, glacial type, whose depthranges are divided into the epilimnion, and metalimnion and hypolimnion [12]. The Epilimmnion represent the shallow shore areas, the hypolimnion the deep,unmoved sedimentation basin with anaerobic environment and the metalimnion is the area around the temperature thermocline (thermocline) in 10-30 metersDepth. At this thermocline, fine suspensions are deposited as a pelagic fallout deep in the lake. Because ofthe winter circulation and summer stagnation due todifferent temperatures, layers gradually change with the1055.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
seasons, the sedimentation relationship result in an alternation of sandstone and mudstone within the basinsediments. Thus, the different sectors can be dividedinto beach facies, deep basin facies of the hypolimnion,basin rim facies of the metalimnion and delta/shore facies. The frequent alternation of different facies in themapping area is called facies gearing. In the summerthere are high sedimentation rates with silt, in the winter, there are significantly lower accumulation rates between 0.3 and 5 mm / y [13].Beach and dune facies: This facies consists ofconglomerates and gray-white sandstone, whosefeldspates are weathered to kaolinite, suggesting semiarid conditions. The rocks do not form layers and showpartially fine lines in the mm - range, and have a slightly darker shade. Microscopically, the main ingredientsare quartz, kaolinite, and feldspar (microcline). Minorconstituents are hydroxides, muscovite and calcite. Themain components are feldspar and quartzite. Quartz isoften overgrown with calcite. The muscovite containspartially zirconium minerals. The grain sizes vary between 0.1 and 0.8 mm, (coarse sandstone). The maficrock is sorted poorly and the minerals are better rounded than other rocks in the same formation. Rarely, thequartz clears undulos out, suggesting several places oforigin. The matrix consists of calcite and kaolinite. Oxidation seeds occur in the dune facies, these are red,rounded areas with raised iron oxide content. With theemergence of such beach dunes, a wind speed of 16km \ h is a prerequisite. Partly in this area, there arepetrified trees (xylite, lignite).Shallow water facies of the epilimnion: These facies represent the proximal area of flat water in beachproximity (metaIimnion ~ epilimnion) and are of 10-20cm thickness. They show clear ripple marks, whichchange with shale layers. The ripple marks suggest apreferred water flow direction and a deltaic formationmechanism. The grain size of the shale layers are between 0.02 to 0.1 mm. The grain size of layers withripple marks are about 0.25 mm, with well sortedgrains. The dimensions of the wave -ripple marks enables a reconstruction of the water flow conditions inthe mapped area. The ripple marks are about 2.5 cmhigh and 10-12 cm in length. Calculated with [14], thewater flow speed was about 30-40 cm/s.Deep lake facies of the hypolimnion: These rocksare characterized as alternating fine sand and shale deposits with layers of about 1 cm and represent the annual laminations, a yearly rate of accumulation in thelower basin. These facies represent the distal part ofthe basin in the cold, deep water, the hypolimnion.Coarse grained summer-layers with calcitic matrix andfine-grained bituminous winter layer are present. Layers of this type are called varves. A varve like stratification in Paganzo Basin was described by [15] too.Wave energy, in the form of turbulence, reaches themetalimnion but the hypolimnion is not affected, sincethe density gradient in the metalimnion acts as an energy barrier [16]. The grain size is 0.05 - 0.2 mm, thegrains are angular and well stocked. These rocks arecalled siltstones. In these layers, synsedimentary foldshave been observed. These slumping structures arecaused by rising deltaic weight and steepening. Thesefolds hint for deeper basins and are signs for steep topography in the upper carboniferous [16].  References: [1] Sgrosso, P. (1949) Rev. Mus. LaPlata Sec. Geol. 4: 223-245. [2] Erdmann, J. F. (1951)— Thesis, 174. Museo La Plata. [3] Zuchi, P. J. (1952)Dipl. Thesis., Museo de La Plata. [4] Gonzalez Diaz E.F. (1970) - Actas IV Cong. Geol. Arg., 2: 163-186;Mendoza. [5] Espizua, S. & Caminos, R. (1979) Buletin de la Academia Nacional de Ciencias, 53: 125143; Cordoba, Argentinia. [6] Barreda, V., Bellosi, E.& Jalfin, G. (1985) Bol. Late Paleozoic of South America (211): 20-22. [7] Moreno, P. E. (1994) Dipl. Thesis, Universidad Nacional de Tucuman, Facultad deCiencas Naturales e lnstituto Miguel Lillo. [8]Archangelsky, S. & Wagner, Fl. H. (1980) ll Cong.Arg. Paleont. Biostrat. y I Congr. Latinoam. Paleont.,4: 257-269. [9] Azcuy, C. L. (1982) Actas ll Cong.Arg. Paleont. y Biostrat. y I Cong. Latinoam. Paleont.(Buenos Aires 1978), 4: 51-67. [10] Gonzalez Diaz E.F. (1970) Actas IV Cong. Geol. Arg., 2: 163-186. Mendoza. [11] Barreda, V., et al. (1985) Bol. Late Paleozoic of South America (Pro). 211): 20-22. [12] BeadleL.C. (1981) 365 S., London (Longman). [13] Fuechtbauer, H. (1988): 1141 S., Stuttgart (Schweizerbart).[14] Reineck, H.E. & Singh, I. B. (1973) 439 S.; Berlin(Springer). [15] Limarino, C.O. and Cesari, S.N.(1987) Paleogeogr., Paleoclimatol., Paleoecol., 65:115-131. [16] Talbot, M. F. and Allen, P. A. (1996)Lakes. - In: Reading H. G. (ed.) 3rd ed., 83-124 Oxford (Blackwell).Fig. 1: Aerial view of the mapped area, the arrowspoint to the Trampeadero Formation, clearly visible aslight toned deposits.1055.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
