1066.PDF
EVALUATING THE THICKNESS OF THE MARTIAN ICE-CEMENTED CRYOSPHERE USING THERMAL MODELING AND IMPACT CRATER MORPHOLOGY. D. K. Weiss and J. W. Head, Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, U.S.A. (david_weiss@brown.edu)  Introduction: Can the examination of deep subsurface ice through time offer insight into the ancient martian geologic history? Modern mean annual surface temperatures (MAST) on Mars are well below 273 K at all latitudes. In concert with the relatively low martian geothermal heat flux in the Amazonian [1], this allows temperatures below the freezing point of water to be pervasive in the martian subsurface. This results in a scenario in which ice, if present, would be stable within the upper kilometers of the subsurface [1]. This subsurface zone in which water-ice is stable is referred to as the cryosphere [1]. Places where ice fills the pore-space within the rocks and regolith composing the cryosphere, is known as the ice-cemented cryosphere (ICC). The ICC grows from the bottom-up, primarily through either upward thermal vapor diffusion of deeper groundwater, which freezes onto the downward-propagating cryosphere freezing front [1]; and/or groundwater freezing onto the cryosphere freezing front in places where groundwater is in direct contact with the freezing front [1]. Clifford et al. [1] modeled the Amazonian cryosphere thickness (i.e., the maximum depth to the bottom of the cryosphere) under a variety of ice melting isotherms, geothermal heat fluxes, and regolith thermal conductivity configurations, and found cryosphere depths generally ranging from 0-9 km at the equator and ~10-22 km at the poles, depending on a wide range of parameters. While these models are critical in estimating the theoretical thickness of the cryosphere, it has remained unclear to what depth the cryosphere is actually filled with pore-ice. Impact crater morphology: Previous investigators [e.g., 2, 3] have suggested that variations in martian impact crater morphology can be used to constrain the structure of the target in which craters form. A class of Late Hesperian-Amazonian-aged martian layered ejecta crater, single-layered ejecta (SLE) craters [2] (Fig. 1a), are interpreted to form exclusively from impacts in the ICC [e.g., 2, 3] (Fig. 1c). Conversely, multiple-layered ejecta (MLE) craters (Fig. 1b) are interpreted to excavate material from below the ICC [2, 3] (Fig. 1c). In the context of this interpretation, by finding the transition diameter (and excavation depth) between SLE/MLE craters across the planet (Fig. 1d) we can estimate the global average ICC thickness. Our preliminary results suggest that the average diameter at which SLE craters transition into MLE craters (Fig. 1d) (which we interperet to represent an estimate of the thickness of the ICC; e.g., Fig, 1c) may be ~1.3 km deep at the equator, and ~2.3 km deep at the poles (green and black markers in Fig. 1d). These values are consistent with the prediction of a latitudedependent cryosphere thickness [1]. Interestingly, we find that the ICC is anomalously thin (~1.3-2.3 km) compared with the cryosphere thicknesses predicted by Amazonian thermal models (typically ~3-22 km [1]).We thus hypothesize that the subsurface ice-volume may have been supply-limited in the past [4]. The thickness of the cryosphere (i.e., the depth of the ice melting isotherm) increases with time as the planetary heat flux declines. Because thermal models predict a thick Amazonian cryosphere relative to the thin measured ICC, the freezing front of the cryosphere may have reached the base of the ICC (i.e., assimilated all underlying groundwater and stopped growing; hereafter referred to as ICC stabilization) prior to the Amazonian period. The Hesperian-aged outflow channels are suggested to form through groundwater release from a pressurized aquifer [e.g., 5], and thus offer geologic evidence for groundwater below the cryosphere within the Hesperian period, following which the cryosphere could have assimilated all underlying groundwater. Indeed, Russell and Head [6] found no evidence for a post-impact lake from groundwater inflow in the Amazonian-aged 215 km diameter Lyot crater, which could indicate that no Figure 1. A) SLE crater. B) MLE crater. C) Interpreted target structure for SLE/MLE craters. D) Diameteters of SLE craters (red riangles) and MLE craters (blue squares) as a function of latitude, and the transition diameter (green squares and black circles). 1066.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
groundwater was present below the Amazonian ICC at the time of impact. Could the ICC have stabilized during an earlier period in the history of Mars? Under what obliquity, geothermal heat flux, and atmospheric pressure conditions can the ICC stabilize? Cryosphere thermal models: In order to address these questions, we generate thermal models (following the methods of [1]) of Amazonian-age through Late Noachian-age cryosphere thicknesses for comparison with the measured ICC thickness derived from Late Hesperian-Amazonian-aged SLE/MLE craters (Fig. 1d). Because the thickness of the ICC is dependent upon MAST and geothermal heat flux [7], a comparison between the measured ICC thickness and thermal models offers a way to investigate ancient martian surface temperatures. Obliquity: Because the obliquity of Mars varies on a 105-106 yr timescale [8], we first explore the effects of varying obliquity on the thickness of the cryosphere (which can respond to the 106 yr variations). Our thermal models adopt the present-day Amazonian MAST model results from [9] (0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°). Using these models, we find the least-squares fit (and best correlating) MAST and heat flow configurations that can reproduce the magnitude and form of the measured ICC. Our models show the R2 values of the ICC fits as a function of surface heat flux (Fig. 2a), as well as the corresponding best-fit models (Fig. 2b). These results show that the 30° obliquity model offers the best fit to the measured ICC thickness (R2>0.9), but the surface heat flux is required to be 108 mW/m2, which is a factor of ~3-5 too large for the Amazonian period [10]. Thus, although the near present-day obliquity appears to be a good fit to the ICC, the surface heat flux must be greatly elevated, indicating ICC stabilization during an earlier period of Mars. Alternitively, a higher atmospheric pressure during an earlier period of Mars might also produce good fits. Atmospheric pressure: In order to explore the effects of atmospheric pressure on the ICC thickness, we parameterize MAST as a function of atmospheric pressure using the atmospheric pressure/MAST relationships from Fastook and Head [7] derived from the LNIH climate models of Wordsworth et al. [11] for 25° obliquity (CO2 atmosphere with 100% humidity). Our preliminary results for the Late Noachian thermal models (Fig. 2c) show that the 1 bar Late Noachian atmosphere offers a poor fit (R2<0.3) to the measured ICC thickness, while the 200 mbar and 8 mbar models offer a better fit (R2>0.8). The heat flux values that produce the best fit models are 86 mW/m2 (200 mbar atmosphere), and 110 mW/m2 (8 mbar atmosphere) (Fig. 2d). These heat flux values are still too high for the Late Noachian period, which is predicted to have a surface heat flux between ~45 and ~65 mW/m2 [10]. Moreover, these Late Noachian models offer only a snapshot in time of candidate MAST and heat flow conditions (at 3.8 Ga) which allow the ICC to stabilize (e.g., higher MAST with lower heat flux values are also feasible). Cryosphere through time: In order to assess the conditions of ICC stabilization over the entire martian geologic history, we examine the MAST of the best-fit model results as a function of planetary heat flow through time [12] (under a wide range of  ice melting isotherms and crustal thermal conductivity configurations). This provides a minimum-bound MAST estimate during the Late Noachian period of Mars of ≥214-231 K, and constrains the age of ICC stabilization to ≥2.1 Ga. References: 1) Clifford et al., JGR, 115, E7, 2010; 2) Barlow and Bradley, Icarus, 87, 1, 1990; 3) Weiss and Head, Icarus, 233, 2014; 4) Carr and Head, GRL, 42, 3, 2015; 5) Andrews-Hannah and Phillips, JGR, 112, E8, 2007; 6) Russell and Head, GRL, 29, 17, 2002; 7) Fastook and Head, PSS, 106, 2015; 8) Lasker et al., Icarus, 170, 2, 2004; 9 Haberle et al., Icarus, 161, 1, 2003;10) McGovern et al., JGR, 109, E7, 2004; 11) Wordsworth et al., Icarus, 222, 1, 2015; 12) Montési and Zuber, JGR, 108, E6, 2003.  Figure 2. A) R2 values as a function of surface heat flux for different obliquities under Amazonian conditions [8]. B) Best fit models from (A); green squares show the ICC thickness derived from the SLE/MLE crater transition depth (Fig. 1d). C) R2 values for different atmospheric pressures under Late Noachian conditions [6, 10]. D) Best fit models from (C). 1066.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
