1070.PDF
BRACKETING THE AGE OF LUNAR PYROCLASTIC DEPOSITS IN OPPENHEIMER CRATER. M.A. Ivanov1,2,3, C. H. van der Bogert2, H. Hiesinger2, J-H. Pasckert2, and K. Bauch2. 1-Vernadsky Institute RAS, Moscow, Russia, mikhail_ivanov@brown.edu, 2- Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany, 3- Moscow State University of Geodesy and Cartography (MiiGAIK), Moscow, Russia. (mikhail_ivanov@brown.edu)   Introduction: The lunar crater Oppenheimer (35oS, 194oE, ~215 km diameter) is in the NE portion of the SPA basin, immediately to the west of the Apollo basin, which exhibits relatively small mare units on its floor. In contrast, the floor of Oppenheimer (~4.1 Ga old [1]) does not contain mare units, but instead has occurrences of dark mantling materials [2,3], usually interpreted as pyroclastic deposits [4,5]. In our investigation of Oppenheimer crater, we characterize the regional and local geological context of the dark mantles in order to introduce constraints on their age and to assess their possible thickness. Geology of the floor: The floor of Oppenheimer crater is flat and slightly tilted to SE, without evidence of doming, and shows a prominent concentric system of graben near the edges of the floor. The graben occur within a narrow zone and do not propagate toward the center of the floor (Fig. 1). The widths of the graben, where they are well developed, is ~1-1.5 km and their depth varies from a few tens to a few hundred meters. Two smaller and younger fracture-floored craters, Oppenheimer-U (O-U, ~40 km diameter) and -H (O-H, ~35 km diameter) are on the NW and SE sides of the Oppenheimer crater, respectively. The O-U crater has a more prominent system of radial and concentric graben on its dome-shaped floor, whereas the O-H crater is shallow and its floor is at about the same topographic level with the rest of the Oppenheimer crater floor. Numerous chains of secondary craters, containing craters up to ~1-2 km in diameter, contaminate the floor of the Oppenheimer crater. The chains are oriented in different directions indicating different parent craters. The orientation of several chains suggest that their source was the crater Davisson (~80 km in diameter), which is ~400 km to SW of Oppenheimer. Eight dark mantle deposits with diameters from ~2 to 45 km occur on the floor of Oppenheimer. All of them are closely associated with the concentric system of graben; the largest mantle overlays the floor and the rim of the O-U crater (Deposit A, Fig. 1). Circular or slightly elongated depressions usually occur in the center of the dark mantles and likely represent deposit vents. The mantles have an equidimensional shape that is approximately symmetric relative to the apparent vents. In the Clementine FeO abundance map [6], the dark mantles exhibit enhanced FeO content. In this respect, the dark mantles are similar to the mare units within the Apollo basin and strongly different from other materials on the floor of Oppenheimer. Some of the secondary craters from the crater Davisson occur within a dark mantle near the southern edge of the Oppenheimer floor (Deposit B, Fig. 1). In the FeO abundance map, these craters appear as spots with the lower FeO content, similar to that of the background of the Oppenheimer floor, indicating they have likely excavated through the dark mantle deposit. Crater counts: In our study, we applied crater sizefrequency distribution measurements (CSFD) to pursue two goals: 1) determination of the absolute model age (AMA) of structures that bracket the age(s) of the dark mantles, and 2) assessment of the thickness of one dark mantle deposit. For the first goal, we counted craters using a WAC mosaic on the eastern and northwestern ejecta of the O-U crater, which stratigraphically predates the dark mantle, and on the floor of the Davisson crater, which postdates the dark mantle. The CSFD on the O-U ejecta corresponds to an AMA of ~3.98+0.02/-0.03 Ga; the floor of the Davisson crater is ~3.66+0.04/-0.06 Ga old. For the second goal, we used a high-resolution NAC image (M112673021RE, 0.65 m/pixel) to count and measure small craters inside and outside the dark mantle near the northern edge of the Oppenheimer floor (Deposit C, Fig. 1). The count areas within the mantle characterize a presumably thinner part of the deposit near its edge (northern area) and a thicker part of the deposit closer to the apparent source (southern area). Deposition of younger material renovates the surface, causing a knee in the CSFDs representative of a younger age, but which can also be used to determine the thickness of the younger deposit [7,8]. The CSFDs both inside and outside the dark mantle are the same for craters larger than ~11 m (Fig. 2). For the smaller diameters, craters outside the mantle show systematically higher crater densities, while both areas inside the dark mantle have similar crater densities for the diameter range from ~11 m down to ~2 m (near the resolution limit). Discussion: Structures of the graben zone crater, which obviously were the sources of the dark mantles on the floor of the Oppenheimer, appear at about same degree of degradation and do not show evidence for multiple stages of development. This suggests that the graben formed during a single tectonic episode. The tight spatial association of the graben and the dark mantles suggests that the graben formation was accompanied by pyroclastic activity. In the framework of these interpretations, the age of the O-U crater (~3.98 Ga) upper limit for pyroclastic activity in the Oppenheimer crater. The age of the crater Davisson (~3.66 Ga), associated with secondary craters that break through the mantle of Deposit B, represents the youngest possible age for the pyroclastic deposits. Thus, the pyroclastic activity in the crater Oppenheimer occurred during the Nectarian-Lower Imbrian epochs [9], close in time to the formation of the mare units within the Apollo basin [10]. The deficiency of craters smaller than ~11 m within the dark mantle of Deposit C may suggest that the emplacement of pyroclastic material erased a portion of the original crater population. In this case, the relationships between the rim height and the crater diameter [11] allows estimation of the thickness of the overlying layer. The rim height of an 11 m crater, according to the Pike's formula is ~0.4 m, which represents the maximum possible thickness of the mantling deposit. Thus, the apparent thickness of Deposit C is small (<1 meter). The ancient age of the dark mantles in the Oppenheimer crater dictates, however, that such a thin layer of superposing materials must be completely reworked by meteorite gardening and mixed into the underlying regolith [12]. Thus, the deficiency of the smaller craters within the dark mantle (Fig. 2) likely 1070.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
reflects not the original thickness of the pyroclastic deposit, but rather the enhanced degradation of craters on poorly consolidated pyroclastic material [13]. Another possible explanation of the lower density of the smaller craters is that the target properties (i.e., strength, porosity) of the pyroclastic material systematically shifted diameters of the craters toward smaller sizes [14-17]. The symmetrical shape of the dark mantles relative to their apparent vents suggests that the original thickness of the mantling material was progressively diminished toward the mantle edges. In this case, the younger craters that penetrated the dark deposits to excavate underlying materials should be systematically larger closer to the deposit centers and smaller toward the deposit edges. On the surface of Deposit C, there are 129 craters in the diameter range from ~3 to ~150 m whose ejecta are brighter than the surrounding dark material. These craters, however, do not show a correlation between crater diameter and distance from the vent (Fig. 3). The absence of a correlation may imply that: (1) the thickness of the original deposit was approximately the same even with increasing distance from the vent. This is unlikely because pyroclastic activity usually forms cone-shaped constructs, (2) meteorite bombardment equalized the originally small thickness of the dark mantle since its formation. This process would inevitable caused mixing of materials of the dark mantle and the underlying regolith, and (3) the thickness of the original deposit was large enough and the craters with bright ejecta did not excavate material from beneath the deposit. In this case, the brighter ejecta simply represent the immature regolith of the dark mantle. The detailed analysis of the brightness values and the spectral characteristics (e.g., FeO content, maturity index) of the bright ejecta, the background material of the dark mantles, and materials outside the dark mantles is needed to evaluate the two later possibilities.  Acknowledgements: This work was conducted in Muenster University and Moscow State University of Geodesy and Cartography and financially supported by a grant from the Russian Science Foundation (Grant 14-2200197) to MAI  References: [1] Hiesinger H.et al., (2012) LPS-43, #2863. [2] Gaddis L.R., et al. (2003) Icarus, 161, 262. [3] Gaddis L.R., et al. (2013) LPS-44, #2262. [4] Head, J.W., (1974) PLPS 5th, 207. [5] Heiken G.H. et al. (1974) GCA, 38, 1703. [6] Lucey P. et al. (1998) JGR, 103, 3679. [7] Hiesinger H. et al. (2002) GRL, 29. [8] Platz T. et al. (2010) EPSL, 293, 388. [9] Stöffer, D.et al. (2006) RMG, 60, 519. [10] Pasckert, J-H, et al. (2016) this conf. [11] Pike R. (1977) PLPS 8th, 3427. [12] Parker R.A. (1973) Apollo-17 PSR, 3-1-3-7. [13] Lucchitta B.K., Sanches A.G. (1975) PLPS 6th, 2427. [14] Schultz P.H. et al. (1977) PLPS 8th, 3539. [15] Gaddis L., et al. (2011) LPS-42, #2584. [16] van der Bogert, C. H. et al. (2013) LPS-44, #1962. [17] van der Bogert, C.H. et al. (2016) this conf.  1070.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
