 Hyperspectral micro-imaging  in the Visible-Infrared range of enstatite chondrite: preliminary investigation on thin section of Sahara 97072 P.Manzari1, S.De Angelis1,  M.C.De Sanctis1,  Space Astrophysics and Planetology Institute - INAF-IAPS, via Fosso del Cavaliere, 100 - 00133, Rome (Italy) (paola.manzari@iaps.inaf.it) Introduction. The analyses  of the  minute quantities of meteorites  and  the  samples  returned  from  next  space missions makes it vital to develop non-invasive or semiinvasive  diagnostic  research  methods  to  study  these materials.  The reasons stand not only in the preservation of sample of extraterrestrail material, but also for opening the possibilities to investigate the same sample by new technologies  developed  in  time  for  comparing  and interpreting old data at the light of new data. The present study focused on the spectral analyses of an enstatite  chondrite  EH3,  Sahara  97072  previously investigated by [1]. Enstatite chondrites have important implications for constraining conditions in the early solar system and for understanding the evolution of the Earth and  other  inner  planets.  They  are  among  the  most reduced  solar  system  materials  as  reflected  in  their mineral compositions and assemblages.  In fact, they are characterized  by  a  highly  reduced  mineralogy  that  is dominated  by  nearly  pure  enstatite,  with  lesser  Fe-Ni metal  (kamacite)  and Fe sulfide  (troilite).   It  has  been suggested  that  Mg and Ca sulfides could contribute  to Mercury's low reflectance, given the high abundance of sulfur  and apparent correlations among S, Mg, and Ca (Nittler et al. 2011; Weider et al.2012). Given  the lack of meteorites that sample of the surface of Mercury, spectral studies  of  meteorites  with reduced  mineral  assemblage like EC could be useful  for interpreting Mercury remote sensed data.  The objective of this study focused on  the capability  of  the  Spectral  Imaging  (SPIM)  facility  at INAF-IAPS,  Rome [2,3]  to  perform  spectral  analysis (range 0.4-5 micron) on thin section. Instrument setup. The imaging spectrometer installed in SPIM is a spare of the spectrometer on Dawn spacecraft [4]. It works in the 0.22-5.05 μm spectral range, with a spatial  resolution  of  38x38  μm  on  the  target.  Two bidimensional  focal  plane  arrays,  one  for  the  visible between 0.22 and 1.05 μm (spectral resolution of 2 nm) and one for the IR between 0.95 and 5.05 μm (spectral resolution  of  12  nm)  allow  to  obtaining  the  spectral coverage. Thanks to the alignment of the bidimensional focal  planes  with the spectrometer'  slit  axis  (the slit  is 9x0.038 mm in size), it is possible to acquire the target's image of 0.038x9 mm at different wavelengths.  Hyperspectral  cubes are built up observing the target  moving on  a  scanning  sample  holder.  Two  lamps  provide  the light  sources  for  the VIS  channel  (120 W) and the IR channel (108 W). The illuminating system supports two distinct  optical  fibres  for  the  VIS  and IR  channel;  the illumination  and  emission  angles  are  30°  and  0°  with respect to the normal to the sample surface, respectively. Sample  description. As  a  preliminary  test  we  collect data on an small area near the edge of the sample (fig.1). Previously  investigations  by  optical  microscopy  and scanning  electron  microscopy  (fig.  2-3)  on  this  thin section  showed  a  composition  dominated  by  radial pyroxene,  porphyritic  pyroxene  and  porphyritic pyroxene-olivine chondrules within the kamacite-sulfide matrix.  Minor  phases  occurr  like  trolite,  oldhamite, niningerite,  schereibersite  (Manzari,  PhD  thesis,  2010) within the matrix and the chondrules. The  pyroxene is always enstatitic and  the olivine is forsteritic. Fig.1.  RGB  image  acquired  with  SPIM  on  the  thin  section (R:0.70 m, G:0.53 m, B:0.44 m). Analysis and results.  Data were collected on a region that comprehend fusion crust of this meteorite to sample also  alteration  minerals.  Since  the  minerals  more abundant  in  enstatite  chondrites  show  their characteristical  absorptions  in  the  visible-near  infrared range, only this range is showed. This area is dominated by  a  big  olivine-pyroxene  chondrule,  named  S2AC1, hosting  troilite,  niningerite  and  a  metal-sulfide  matrix. The  spectral  analysis  of  the  thin  section  showed occurrences  of  four  spectral  classes:  enstatite  (fig.1), forsterite  (fig.2),  sulfides  (fig.3),  but  also  oxides  and hydro-oxides (fig.4). In all the spectra occurr  1.9  m feature related to water content  in  the  sample.  Furthemore,  iron  oxides  and hydro-oxides strongly affect the resulting spectra of these different mineralogical phases. Fig.2.  Spectrum  of  chondrule  rim  grain  (x141y23).  The 500 m  composition  of  chondrule  rim  is  enstatite.  The  spectrum  is dominated by features near 1  m and 2m typical of that of enstatite. Data in  1.4 and 2.5 m regions have been removed because of overlapping with instrumental artifacts. Fig.3.  Backscattered  electron  image  of  S2AC1  chondrule showing sulfide phases in chondrule core. Fig.4.   Pixel spectrum of olivine (x109y37).  The spectrum is dominated by features near 1  m. The other spectral features are  related  to  water  absorption.  Data  in   1.4  and  2.5  m regions  have  been  removed  because  of  overlapping  with instrumental artifacts. Other pixels, such as x154y17 in fig.5 showed almost featurless profiles with an exception related to a strong absorption near 0.65m that could correspond to the occurrence of niningerite grains  (fig.3)  [5].  Among  the  sulfides,  totally  featurless spectra were found that are related to troilite occurrence. Fig.5. Pixel spectrum of sulfide grain (x109y37), probably MgS [5].  Data  in   1.4  and  2.5  m  regions  have  been  removed because of overlapping with instrumental artifacts. Fig.6.  Pixel  spectrum  of  goethite  formed  by  terrestrial weathering in areas near to the fusion crust. Conclusions and future work.  The preliminary results of  this  investigation  demonstrate  that  capability  of  the SPIM facility to act as a spectral microscope, that in turns means  an  easier  comparison  with  other  analytical methods. Further investigations are on going on areas far from the fusion crust of this chondrite for a more closer identification of the different sulfides that occur in this chondrite. References.  [1]  P.  Manzari,  PhD  thesis,  2010 [2] Coradini  A.,  et  al.,  EPSC  Abstracts,  EPSC-DPS20111043,  vol.6,  2001.  [3]  De Angelis  S.,  et  al.,  Rev.  Sci. Instrum., 86, 093101, 2015. [4] De Sanctis M.C., et al., Space Sci. Rev., 163, 329-369, 2011. [5] Domingue D. L. et al.,  Space Science Reviews, 181, 121-214, 2014. Acknowledgements.  We  thanks  ASI  -  Italian  Space Agency for supporting this work. 