 A FOSSILIZED SNOWLINE IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM PROTOPLANETARY DISK.  A. Morbidelli 1, B. Bitsch 2, A. Crida 1,4 , M. Gounelle 3,4 , T. Guillot 1, S. Jacobson 1,5 , A. Johansen 2, M. Lambrechts 1, and E. Lega 1, 1 Laboratoire Lagrange, UMR7293, Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Observatoire de la Côte d'Azur, 2 Lund Observatory, Department of Astronomy and Theoretical Physics, Lund University, 3 IMPMC, Muséum national d'histoire naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, CNRS, UPMC & IRD, 4 Institut Universitaire de France, 5 Bayerisches Geoinstitut, University of Bayreuth  Introduction:  The terrestrial planets and the asteroids dominant in the inner asteroid belt are water poor. However, in the protoplanetary disk the temperature should have decreased below water-condensation level well before the disk was photo-evaporated[1,2,3]. Thus, the global water depletion of the inner Solar System is puzzling[1]. This is called the snowline problem. The composition of the inner Solar System bodies seems to reflect the chemistry of a disk fossilized when the location of the snowline was at about 3 AU, i.e. that of an early disk, still vigorously accreting onto the central star with a rate of several 10 -8 Solar masses / year [3]. In [4] the depletion in volatile elements of inner solar system bodies was explained considering that the disk evolves and looses mass over time so that, by the time the temperature in the inner disk has decreased below a given condensation value, there is less material to condense.   However, we have showed [5] that this explanation is not valid, at least in the case of water. In fact, even if the inner disk eventually becomes cold, there cannot be direct condensation of water. This is because the snowline moves towards the Sun more slowly than the gas itself. Thus the gas in the vicinity of the snowline always comes from farther out, where it should have already condensed, and therefore it should be dry. The appearance of ice in a range of heliocentric distances swept by the snowline can only be due to the radial drift of icy particles from the outer disk. Thus understanding the drift of icy particles through the disk is the key to solve the  snowline problem.  Fossilizing the snowline position: It was shown in [6,7] that, if a planet with a mass larger than 20 Earth mass is present, the radial drift of particles is interrupted, because such a planet gives the disk a superKeplerian rotation just outside of its own orbit. This process is often considered to be at the origin of the socalled ``transitional disks''. From this result, we propose that the precursor of Jupiter achieved this threshold mass when the snowline was still around 3 AU. This effectively fossilized the snowline at that location. In fact, even if it cooled later, the disk inside of Jupiter's orbit remained ice-depleted because the flow of icy particles from the outer system was intercepted by the planet.  Chronological considerations: The barrier to particle radial drift induced by the presence of the protoJupiter would not just have cut off the flow of icy material. It would also have cut off the flow of silicates. Thus, once the local particles had drifted away, the accretion of planetesimals should have stopped everywhere inside the orbit of the planet. Thus, it seems natural to expect that the chondrites should have stopped accreting at about the time of fossilization of the snowline position.   There is, however, a second possibility. If there had been some mechanism recycling particles (i.e. sending the particles back out once they came close enough to the star), or producing new particles in situ, it is possible to envision that chondrules continued to form and chondrites continued to accrete them even after the flow of particles from the outer disk was cut off. In that case, the proto-Jupiter should still have formed when the snowline was at about 3 AU, but we would not have any chronological constraint on when this happened. It could have happened significantly earlier than the condrite accretion time (i.e. earlier than ~3 My).  A mechanism for producing small particles in situ is obviously collisions between planetesimals. Chondrules have been proposed to have formed as debris from collisions of differentiated planetesimals[8,9]. In addition, several mechanisms leading to a recycling of particles have been proposed, such as x-winds [10], gas outflow on the midplane [11] and disk winds [12].  Discussions and Implications: The scenario described above is summarized in the sketch of Fig. 1.  This scenario is consistent, at least at the qualitative level, with the fact that ordinary and enstatite chondrites contain some water (typically less than 1% by mass, well below solar relative abundance of ~50%) and show secondary minerals indicative of water alteration [13,14]. In fact, it is conceivable that some particles managed to jump across the orbit of the protoJupiter (either because they were small enough to be entrained in the gas flow or by mutual scattering, once sufficiently piled up at the edge of Jupiter's gap). Because the entire asteroid region presumably had a temperature well below ice-sublimation by the time these chondrites formed, the icy particles that managed to pass through the planet's orbit would have been available in the asteroid belt region to be accreted. Of course,  if most of the particles were retained beyond the orbit of Jupiter, the resulting abundance of water in these meteorites would have remained well below 50% by mass, as observed.   Fig.1: Sketch of the solution to the follisized condensation lines problem proposed in this paper. The top and central panels show the situation at the times when the silicate line, first, then the snowline, remain fossilized. The bottom  panel sketches the situation after the fossilization of the snowline, under the assumption where accretion of planetesimals in the inner disk continues thanks to the recycling of small particles in outwards flows. If a recycling or particlegeneration mechanism did not exist, all planetesimals inside of the orbit of proto-Jupiter should have stopped accreting at the time of fossilization of the snowline.   If a mechanism for recycling/producing particles in the inner disk really existed, an implication would be that planetesimals on either side of Jupiter's orbit eventually accreted from distinct reservoirs. The planetesimals inside of the orbit of the planet accreted only material recycled from the inner disk; instead the planetesimals outside of the proto-Jupiter's orbit accreted outer disk material, although possibly contaminated by some inner-disk material transported into the outer disk. In this respect, it may not be a coincidence that ordinary and carbonaceous chondrites appear to represent distinct chemical and isotopic reservoirs. Today the parent bodies of both classes of meteorites reside in the asteroid belt, i.e. inside of the orbit of Jupiter. But in the Grand Tack scenario [15] the parent bodies of the carbonaceous chondrites formed beyond Jupiter's orbit and got implanted into the asteroid belt during the phase of Jupiter's migration. Another implication is that planetary systems without giant planets should be much more rich in water in their inner regions than our system. This seems consistent with the observations, which show a large number of systems of low-density super-Earths in close-in orbits and no giant planets farther out [16].  References: [1] Oka A., Nakamoto T., Ida S. (2011) ApJ,738, 141. [2] Garaud P. and Lin D.N.C. (2007) ApJ, 654, 606. [3] Bitsch B., Johansen A., Lambrechts M., Morbidelli A. (2015) A&A, 575, AA28. [4]Cassen P. (1996) MAPS, 31, 793. [5] Morbidelli A. and 9 coauthors (2016) Icarus, in press. [6] Morbidelli A. and Nesvorny D. (2012) A&A, 546, AA18. [7] Lambrechts M., Johansen A., Morbidelli A. (2014) A&A, 572, AA35. [8] Libourel G. and Krot A.N. (2007) EPSL 254, 1. [9] Asphaug E., Jutzi M., Movshovitz N. (2011) EPSL, 308, 369. [10] Shu F.H., Shang H., Glassgold A.E., Lee T. (1997)  Science, 277, 1475. [11] Ciesla, F.J. (2007) Science, 318, 613. [12]  Bai X.N. (2014) ApJ, 791, 137. [13] Alexander C.M.O., Barber D.J., Hutchison R. (1989) GCA, 53, 30453057.[14] Baker L., Franchi I.A., Wright I.P., Pillinger C.T.(2003) EGS - AGU - EUG Joint Assembly 11198. [15] Walsh K.J., Morbidelli A., Raymond S.N., O'Brien D.P., Mandell A.M.(2011) Nature, 475, 206. [16] Fressin F., and 8 co-authors (2013) ApJ, 766, 81.                     