1121.PDF
SHINING A LIGHT ON PLANETARY PROCESSES USING SYNCHROTRON POWDER DIFFRACTION H. E.A. Brand1 , J. A. Kimpton1 and Q. Gu1, 1Australian Synchrotron, 800 Blackburn Rd., Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia. powder.diffraction@synchrotron.org.au   Introduction: The Australian Synchrotron is powerful source of electromagnetic radiation that produces photon energies up to 3 GeV. The powder diffraction (PD) beamline at the Australian synchrotron produces bright, highly-collimated X-ray beams that, when combined with the state-of-the-art MYTHEN II microstrip detector, are ideal for time-resolved X-ray powder diffraction experiments requiring rapid, highresolution data collection. In addition, the powder diffraction beamline exploits the unique properties of synchrotron radiation to offer tunable wavelengths (6 - 30 keV, 2.07 - 0.41 Å) to minimise sample absorption and fluorescence, provide high flux and good S/N for increased detection limits. Since beginning user operations in 2008, 490 user experiments have been performed at the powder diffraction beamline. This contribution describes and demonstrates the capabilities offered by the beamline, particularly for planetary sciences and geosciences applications, highlighting the unique in-situ experiments that have not only produced successful scientific outcomes, but have pushed the boundaries in many cases.   Exemplar data: Jarosite minerals Jarosites are widespread in a number of industrial and environmental settings. Understanding their formation, mineralogy and stability is of the highest priority if we are to streamline industrial processes where jarosites are involved, and understand the geological evolution of environments where they abound. For environments containing jarosite minerals, such as the equatorial regions of Mars, these results help to constrain the environmental conditions which must have been present for these minerals to form and so provide another crucial data point in this planet's complicated geological evolution. Jarosite minerals have been a focus of major research at the beamline and are an excellent mineral system to demonstrate the capabilities of the beamline.  High resolution: In complex mineral systems, as well as crystalline materials with low symmetry, peak overlap is a significant issue in identifying and quantifying the materials present in the laboratory. At the PD beamline, the inherent nature of the synchrotron source, combined with the beamline optics, results in a low dE/E and consequently affords the beamline very high resolution. Figure 1 shows a jarosite diffraction pattern collected on: a typical laboratory powder diffractometer (black trace), compared to the PD beamline (red trace). Indeed, this high resolution allowed a new jarosite structural type to be identified: monoclinic jarosite, previously unidentified in data collected on laboratory instrumentation due to peak overlap.  High flux: Short collection times are afforded by the high flux of the beamline. The lab dataset in figure 1 was collected for ~10 hours while the synchrotron pattern was collected for only 4 minutes.      Figure 1. Powder diffraction pattern of jarosite collected on a) Laboratory instrumentation (black trace), b) powder diffraction beamline at the Australian Synchrotron (red trace).  Sample fluorescence/absorption: Jarosites contain large amounts of iron which can lead to the production of high levels of sample fluorescence causing poor signal-to-noise in laboratory instruments using Cu radiation and Bragg-Brentano geometry. At the synchrotron, a wavelength appropriate to the elements present in the samples can be chosen to avoid such fluorescence (or indeed absorption), issues.  Small sample sizes: The beam size at the powder diffraction beamline is typically 1 x 3 mm. Samples are typically housed in glass capillaries with 0.3 - 0.7 mm diameter. Thus only a very small amount of sample is required compared to the 0.5 - 1 g required for a laboratory powder diffractometer.   1121.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
In situ capabilities: The MYTHEN II microstrip detector is capable of collecting 80° of diffraction data simultaneously. This makes the beamline ideal to perform high-resolution in situ measurements where small amounts of multiple phases can be tracked in real time during a process. Figure 2a illustrates the decomposition of a sodic monoclinic jarosite on heating from 80 K - 700 K. It shows a section of a series of powder diffraction data sets plotted as a function of temperature, viewed down the intensity axis. Figure 2b shows the phase fractions for each phase with time through the experiment.    Figure 2a Sequence of diffraction patterns collected on warming of jarosite from 80 - 700 K viewed down the intensity axis; 2b Accompanying quantitative phase information for the experiment in 2a from 100 - 500 C.  Flexible sample environments and multi-technique measurements: In addition to the inherent properties of the beamline, the powder diffraction beamline has been designed to allow maximum flexibility for sample environments with which to simulate a variety of environmental conditions relevant to geological processes throughout the solar system. Hot air blowers, furnaces and cryo-eqipment can heat the sample from 10 - 2500K. Gas pressures from  0 - 40 bar can be applied and used to create a variety of environments using various gases as well as higher pressures - up to 30 GPa using a diamond anvil cell. Other environments such as electrical and magnetic fields and UV light can be applied and liquids can be flowed over the sample surface.  In addition, other complimentary measurements can be made at the same time as diffraction data is collected to allow comparison between multiple techniques and external (e.g. spacecraft), data. Examples include humidity, Raman, UV-Vis and DTA/DSC measurements.  Apart from the wide array of sample stages and environments available to experimental teams at the beamline, teams are able to bring their own sample stages and environments. The beamline team work closely with groups to develop novel sample environments for specific applications.  Future upgrades to the beamline include a robotic sample changer and an upgrade to the monochromator to improve stability. Sample environment design is an ongoing and exciting challenge as the beamline team strive to meet the needs of a growing and diverse user community.  More information about accessing the beamline can be found at www.synchrotron.org.au or by emailing the beamline team pd@synchrotron.org.au.    1121.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
