1144.PDF
Loess Cave Habitats on Mars.  R. A.  De Hon, Department of Geography, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas  78666  <dehon@txstate.edu>  Introduction. A typical mission plan for a crewed mission to Mars envisions a transit phase of 180 days each way and a surface stay of 500 days.  While on the surface the astronauts will require a habitat that provides shelter from a hostile environment including the wide range in temperature, strong winds, and high levels of ionizing radiation.  The choice of habitats lies between whether to bring readymade shelters or construct shelters with a combination of brought and native materials.  The thin atmosphere and lack of a magnetic field allows high levels of solar energetic particles and galactic cosmic rays at the surface [1].  It might be advantageous to adopt a subsurface dwelling as a means of providing radiation shielding and a more manageable temperature environment [1, 2].   Natural caves, lava tunnels, and alcoves provide possible sites that could be modified for human occupation.   In many respects, the first explorers on Mars will face problems similar to those encountered early man.  Caves and alcoves have served as ready-made shelter for humans from inhospitable environments from the earliest times until the present.  Excavation of artificial caves or alcoves offers an alternative to finding natural caves [3].  Loess and loess-like materials have the unique properties of ease of excavation and the ability to support stable excavated spaces.  Loess. Loess is a predominantly silt-sized (2-5 µm), unstratified sediment [4, 5].  Terrestrial loess is mostly eolian deposited quartz with lesser amounts of clays, sand, and calcium carbonate.  The material is extremely porous and permeable.  Although cohesion between grains by calcite cement is weak, loess stands well in vertical banks.  The material is easily excavated, and chambers dug into loess are selfsupporting.  Alcoves excavated in loess hills or cliffs could be adapted for Martian explorer habitation.  Other materials that offer similar properties include calcareous tufa and volcanic ash (tuff).   Loess and tuff deposits might be a more accessible target for Mars landings.  Terrestrial dwellings.  Primitive people used caves and alcoves as natural protection.  Even when construction techniques developed reasonable sophistication, placement of structures in alcoves provided an extra measure of protection and reduced construction needs.   While Mars explorers are considerably advanced compared to primitive terrestrials; nevertheless, they face some of the same problems in obtaining suitable shelter.   The yaodong of northern China is a dwelling dug into a loess hillside or excavated from a central sunken courtyard [6].  Yaodongs have been in use in China for more than 3000 years, and they currently serve as the dwelling of choice for 40 million inhabitants.  Similar structures are found in loess of Tunisia; tufa of Vardzia in southern Georgia and Matera in southern Italy; and tuff of central Afghanistan and Iran’s East Azerbaijan Province.    Figure 1.  A typical yaodong of northern China dug into loess.  Martian Loess.  Dust storms, dunes, and yardangs attest to the importance of eolian activity on Mars, and satellite and rover observations identify a ubiquitous coating of dust.  In the absence of quartz, silt-sized grains on Mars consist of feldspar, mafic minerals, and sulfates [7, 8]. Silt-size grains are formed by meteor impact, volcanic activity and grain-to-grain eolian impact.  Silt and clay-sized eolian-distributed materials cover large areas of the planet and fill craters [9].  Probable loess deposits may be found in Hellas, filled craters, Arabia, and Elysium.    Detecting dust-sized deposits from orbit is difficult because of the planet-wide surface coating of 1144.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
dust which masks underlying rocks.  Loess deposits, which have identical reflectance spectra as the dust coating, are light-toned and have low thermal inertia.  Satellite imaging and spectroscopic methods may be used to exclude some terrains, but verification will require penetrometers or surface rovers to test physical properties of suspect material.  Construction.   Excavation of loess-like materials with hand equipment is possible, but creation of light-weight, portable, powered digging tools would facilitate excavation of a chamber open on one side.  A large part of the actual excavation could be accomplished by light-weight, uncomplicated machines.  Design of the habitat is controlled by the configuration of the terrain.  Vertical embankments require simple horizontal excavations into the face; sloping hill sides require preparation of a terrace prior to boring in horizontally; and flat terrain will require excavation of a sunken courtyard prior to shaping the alcove.  Design of the habitat may range from simple grottos in a hillside to a combination of ancient yaodongs and more modern earthship designs [3, 10, 11].    Figure 2.  Simple excavation in loess hill to provide living quarters.  On Mars, interior wall serves as both radiation barrier and passive heat dispersion.  Once an alcove is excavated it must be prepared for occupancy.  This may be no more than moving a prefabricated shelter into the alcove. Protected from wind, meteor strikes, and radiation, the shelter may be constructed of less rugged material than one required for surface exposure.  It may even be a non-rigid, inflatable chamber.     Alternately, preparation may involve converting the alcove into a closed environment—lining the walls with an impermeable barrier and constructing closure over the open side of the excavation.  Sealing loess walls may be accomplished by inflating a balloon of impermeable material to fill the alcove; coating the walls with a suitable material; or sintering the walls.  A transparent partition for the open side of the alcove would provide atmospheric containment; provide ambient light into the alcove; and provide some degree of passive heating.  Properly constructed loess dwellings on Earth are efficient in use of solar radiation for heating, and the surrounding mass of material serves as an efficient insulation to maintain near constant temperature [12, 13].  References. [1] Hassler, D.M. (2014)  Sci. 343, 24,  1244797-1-6.  [2] Horz, F. (1895) Lunar bases and space activities of the 21st century, LPI, 405-412.  [3] De Hon, R.A., 2015, 2nd  International Planetary Cave Conf., Abs. 9007.[4] Pye, K. (1995) Quaternary Science Reviews 14: 653–667.  [5] Iriondo, M.H., and D.M. Krohling (2007) Sedimentary Geology, 202 (3), 352-368.  [6] Liping, T. and Cuiping, H. (2008) J. Construction Tech., 6 (040). [7] Bridges, N. T. and D. R. Muhs, (2012) Sedimentary Geology of Mars, 102, 169-182. [8] Grotzinger, J. P. and R. E.  Milliken (2012) Sedimentary Geology of Mars, 102, 1-48.[9] Lewis, K. W. and O. Aharonson (2014) Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 119[10], 14321457. [7] Liu, L. J. H. Q. Y. and Zengfeng, Y. (2007) J. Architecture and Culture, 6(011). [11] Ehrhardt, J. (2002) The Art of Natural Building, 154-157. [12] Zhou, N., M. Nishida, and H. Kitayama (2002) Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering, 1(1), 81-86. [13] Grindley, P. C. and M. Hutchinson (1996) Renewable Energy, 8(1), 154-159. 1144.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
