1167.PDF
Analogue benchmark for simplified planetary differentiationmodelsJake Jordan, Marc HesseJanuary 2016We conduct simple column experiments using an ice-sand slurry and compare them with mathematical models to explore the physical differentiation of small planetary bodies in the early solarsystem. The equations solved include mass conservation, linearized momentum conservation andenergy conservation, with equation of state and constitutive relationsIt is widely accepted that planetary bodies such as Ceres, with low densities (∼ 2077 kg/m3)may contain large amounts of H2O [1]. Furthermore, it is widely accepted that high abundances ofshort-lived radiogenic isotopes, such as 26Al in the early solar system led to interior melting anddifferentiation on many of the first planetesimals [3, 4]. Despite the general consensus regardingthe high water content in some rocky planetesimal bodies and presence of radiogenic heat, it isnot obvious how physical sedimentation processes within the interiors of planetesimals contributedto differentiating rocky planetary bodies with significant H2O water-ice content in the early solarsystem. Depending on the amount of heating due to gravitational forces and decay of radioactiveisotopes, the physical differentiation of the planetary body may be a two or three phase flow problem.We conduct analogue column experiments to explore the sedimentation of silicate material inan ice slurry. We mix shaved ice and sand using a wide range of initial volumetric ratios. Thecolumn is placed on top of a hot plate inside a walk-in freezer. The top of the column, representsthe planetesimal "surface" and is left open, while the column is gradually heated from below. Thewalls of the column are double paned and sealed air-tight with a vacuum drawn between the columnwalls. This disallows heat conduction from the sides of the experiment to the surrounding freezerin an attempt to create a temperature profile throughout the column that replicates a slice of asmall planetary body.As the ice slurry melts, the sandy portion of the matrix collapses, eventually reaching a stable,grain supported configuration. Depending on the ice to sand ratio, an array of physical processesmay occur in the partially molten regions of the column. If the water to sand ratio is high andthe water becomes molten quickly, the sand descends as a sediment front according to hyperbolicconservation laws [2, 5]. In the case where the water to sand ratio is low and melting is slow, thesandy matrix compacts slowly and there is no discernible sedimentation front.Although this analogue model does not capture the local heat sources introduced by short-livedradiogenic isotopes, we hope to benchmark future theoretical models for planetary differentiationwith simple end-member cases from our analogue experiment. The results of our simplified modelcan be extended to include factors such as radiogenic-isotope decay, density changes, release andstorage of latent heat due to phase changes. Our benchmarks will allow a more well-informedscaling analysis and parameterization of future planetesimal formation models.11167.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
References[1] P. A. Bland, W. C. Feldman, M. V. Sykes, and P. S. Insti. 46th Lunar and Planetary ScienceConference ( 2015 ) 46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference ( 2015 ). 85719:1-2, 2015.[2] R. Bu¨rger. Phenomenological foundation and mathematical theory of sedimentationconsolidation processes. Chemical engineering journal, 80(1-3):177-188, 2000.[3] L. T. Elkins-Tanton, B. P. Weiss, and M. T. Zuber. Chondrites as samples of differentiatedplanetesimals. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 305(1-2):1-10, 2011.[4] R. R. Fu and L. T. Elkins-Tanton. The fate of magmas in planetesimals and the retention ofprimitive chondritic crusts. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 390:128-137, 2014.[5] V. Prigiobbe, S. Ko, C. Huh, and S. L. Bryant. Measuring and modeling the magnetic settling ofsuperparamagnetic nanoparticle dispersions. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 447:5867, 2015.21167.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
