1231.PDF
RUTHENIUM ISOTOPE FRACTIONATION DURING PLANETESIMAL CORE CRYSTALLIZATION T. Hopp1, M. Fischer-Gödde1 and T. Kleine1, 1Institut für Planetologie, University of Münster, Wilhelm-Klemm-Str.10, 48149 Münster, Germany, (timo.hopp@wwu.de)Introduction: The chemical compositions of mostiron meteorites are consistent with crystal-liquid partitioning during fractional crystallization of metallic melt[e.g., 1]. On this basis, these 'magmatic' iron meteorites(e.g., groups IIAB and IIIAB) are thought to representsamples  of  the  metallic  cores  of  small  differentiatedplanetary bodies. The process of fractional crystallization during core solidification should in principle alsohave induced an isotopic fractionation between earlyand late-crystallized irons from a given core.  Duringcrystallization  some  elements  are  continuously  removed from the liquid metal and so even a small isotopic  fractionation  between  solid  and  liquid  metalwould lead to a large overall fractionation as crystallization  proceeded.  Thus,  the  identification  of  stableisotope  fractionation  trends  within  a  given  group  ofmagmatic irons would provide strong evidence for theformation of these samples through fractional crystallization of metallic magma. However, until now no stable  isotope  Rayleigh  fractionation  trends  have  beenidentified in iron meteorites. Here we use Ru stable isotopes to investigate thepossible  isotope  fractionation during solidification ofplanetesimal cores. Ruthenium is a highly siderophileelement and as such has been quantitatively removedinto the cores  of  differentiated bodies.  Thus,  the Ruisotopic composition of the bulk core should be similarto that of the undifferentiated body. Moreover,  Ru isstrongly fractionated  within most  iron  groups,  whereearly-crystallized irons have high and late-crystallizedsamples have low Ru contents.  This  strong chemicalfractionation makes Ru a promising element to searchfor  isotope  fractionation  induced  by core  crystallization. For this study we selected six IIAB and seven IIIAB irons covering almost the entire crystallization sequence of both groups. We also analyzed four ordinarychondrites to assess the Ru isotopic composition of undifferentiated material. Additional analyses of IVA andIVB iron meteorites are currently underway.Analytical Methods: Iron meteorite samples (0.05to 0.2 g) were spiked with a  98Ru-101Ru double spikebefore digestion with 20 ml of reverse aqua regia inclosed Teflon beakers at 120°C for 24 hours. Ordinarychondrites (0.5 g) were spiked prior to Carius tube digestion using reverse aqua regia at 220°C for 48 hours[2]. After digestion, Ru was separated from the samplematrix using a combination of cation exchange chromatography and a SavillexTM PFA distillation unit; theRu cut from the cation exchange column is oxidized ina  solution  of  H2SO4  and  CrO3,  and  volatile  Ru wastrapped in H2O2 [3].The Ru isotope measurements were conducted using a Neptune Plus MC-ICPMS at Münster combinedwith an ESI Apex-IR desolvating system. All measurements  were  performed  using  200  ppb  Ru  solutions.Each  measurement  consisted  of  an  on-peak  baselinemeasurement on a solution blank (40×4.2s)  followedby 50 cycles of 4.2s of sample or standard measurements.  Isobaric  interferences  were  monitored  using97Mo and  105Pd. The data reduction was made off-lineusing the Double Spike Toolbox [4]. The Ru isotope results are given in δ102/99Ru as the permil deviation froman  Alfa  Aesar  plasma  standard  solution(Lot#61300952).  The external reproducibility (2 s.d.)of the Ru isotope measurement is 0.04 ‰ for δ102/99Ru.Results: The Ru stable isotope compositions measured for ordinary chondrites and iron meteorites areshown in Fig. 1. The four ordinary chondrites have indistinguishable δ102/99Ru averaging at ca. -0.02 ‰. Ironmeteorites, in contrast, show variable δ102/99Ru with values up to ~0.85 ‰. In Fig. 1, the IIAB and IIIAB samples are sorted by decreasing Ru content from bottomto top within both groups. Of note, samples with highRu contents have Ru stable isotopic compositions similar to ordinary chondrites, while samples with lower Rucontents  display  increasingly  heavier  compositions(Fig. 1).Figure 1: Ruthenium stable isotope composition of ordinarychondrites and iron meteorites. Grey area defines the meancomposition of ordinary chondrites. Errors bars for individual data points are similar to or smaller than symbol sizes. Forirons, the Ru concentration (ppm) is given in square brackets. 1231.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Discussion:  The  correlation  of  δ102/99Ru with  Rucontents observed for both the IIAB and IIIAB irons(Fig.  1)  indicates  that  solidification  of  planetesimalcores  led  to  Ru  isotope  fractionation,  most  likelycaused by incremental extraction of Ru from the metallic liquid into the crystallizing metal. As such, the Ruisotopic data are consistent with formation of the IIABand IIIAB irons by fractional crystallization of metallicmelt.  During  core  crystallization  Ru  is  compatible,meaning  that  early-crystallized  irons  from  a  givengroup have high, while late-crystallized samples havelow Ru contents.  Thus,  the higher  δ102/99Ru for  ironswith the lowest Ru content of each group (Fig. 1) indicate that the Ru isotopic composition of the remainingliquid became increasingly heavy during core crystallization; this isotopically heavy melt is then sampled bythe late-crystallized irons. To  produce  an isotopically heavy metallic liquid,the solids must be isotopically light compared to themelt they crystallized from. However, the isotope fractionation factor between solid and liquid metal probably is small, because early-crystallized IIAB and IIIABirons have δ102/99Ru values indistinguishable from thoseof ordinary chondrites (Fig.  1).  The δ102/99Ru of ordinary chondrites in turn is a likely bulk composition ofiron meteorite  parent  bodies and,  because almost theentire Ru resides in the core, of the parental cores ofthe  IIAB  and  IIIAB  irons.  Thus,  early-crystallizedirons should have a very similar Ru isotopic composition compared to the bulk composition; this is consistent  with  the  indistinguishable  δ102/99Ru observed  forearly-crystallized IIAB and IIIAB irons and ordinarychondrites (Fig. 1).To quantitatively assess as to whether the observedδ102/99Ru variations are consistent with fractional crystallization of a metallic melt, we modeled the isotopiceffects  using  the  Rayleigh  fractionation  equation:102Ru/99Ru = (102Ru/99Ru)0 ×f (α-1), where (102Ru/99Ru)0 isthe initial Ru isotopic composition of the metallic meltand f is the fraction of Ru remaining in the melt at thetiming of crystallization for each sample. To estimate ffor each sample, a model for the chemical fractionationof Ru during crystallization is needed.  Thus, the isotope fractionation factors α determined in the modelingmay be  different  for  different  chemical  fractionationmodels.  Nevertheless,  a  correlation  between  isotopefractionation  and  chemical  fraction  of  Ru remainingshould always be obtained if the Ru isotope data reflectRayleigh fractionation during solidification of metallicmelt. In a first step, we used a simplified chemical fractionation model, where the partition coefficient for Rudoes not change during crystallization. We further assumed that  the  starting  composition  is  given  by  themean  δ102/99Ru  =  -0.02  ‰  determined  for  ordinarychondrites (see above). The model results show that themeasured Ru isotope fractionations for both the IIABand IIIAB irons can be well explained by Rayleigh isotope fractionation during crystallization of an initiallymolten core (Fig. 2; Fig. 3).Figure 2: Ruthenium isotope fractionation during crystallization of the IIAB core. Figure 3: Ruthenium isotope fractionation during crystallization of the IIIAB core.Conclusions: The heavy Ru isotope compositionsof  late-crystallized  IIAB  and  IIIAB  irons  combinedwith the correlation of δ102/99Ru with Ru content is consistent with the formation of these irons by fractionalcrystallization of metallic melt. The Ru isotopic data,therefore, provide strong support for the interpretationof the IIAB and IIIAB irons as fragments of the metallic cores of differentiated planetesimals.References: [1] Scott (1972) GCA 36, 1205-1236. [2]Fischer-Gödde  et  al  (2015)  GCA 168,  151-171.  [3]Shirey & Walker (1995) Anal. Chem. 67, 2136 - 2141.[4] Rudge et al (2009) Chem. Geol. 265, 420 - 431.1231.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
