1242.PDF
THE ATMOSPHERIC EVOLUTION OF MAGMA-OCEAN WORLDS: APPLICATION TO THE EARLY MOON AND EXOPLANETS. P. Saxena, N. E. Petro, and A. M. Mandell NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 20771 (prabal.saxena@nasa.gov) Introduction:  We examine the evolution of an atmosphere around the primordial Moon using a model originally created for Io's atmosphere and applied to exoplanets [1]. The models' inputs include radiative contributions from a global Lunar Magma Ocean and the radiative flux of the post Moon-forming-impact Earth.  We find the atmospheric pressure, temperature and horizontal flow profiles for the early lunar surface as a function of time post-formation.  In addition to important implications for evolution to its current state, the early Moon may be the most accessible solar system analogue for what are likely to be the first well characterized rocky exoplanets in the near future.   Motivation: Despite being one of the most well studied objects in space, there exist a number of critical open questions regarding the physical and chemical state of Moon's surface.  The surface exhibits global asymmetry in crustal thickness and global and local compositional and isotopic gradients.  A number of hypotheses have been invoked in order to explain these features [2-4].  Recently, it was proposed that the radiative contribution of the Earth after the Moon forming impact created a temperature gradient on the tidally locked Moon that influenced the atmospheric deposition of refractories towards the farside [5].  This qualitative model serves as the impetus for our study - which examines the evolution of an early Lunar atmosphere subject to the radiative influence of a Lunar Magma Ocean as well as the radiative contribution of heat from the Earth on the nearside of the Moon.  Model Details:  The atmospheric model we use is the single component, vertically integrated 1 dimensional model developed originally to study Io [1] and which has also been applied to heated Super Earth exoplanets [6].  This model solves for the atmospheric pressure, temperature, and velocity (at the base of the atmosphere) as a function of the angular distance away from the sub-Earth point.  The model solves the conservation equations for mass, momentum, and energy [1].  The choice for a single constituent atmospheric model is based upon expected vaporization pressures for a komatiite magma given in Figure 2 of [7].  Vaporization pressures as a function of temperature were fit to the Clausius Clapyeron relation for each of the dominant constituents. For equilibrium temperatures up to nearly 3500K, the vapor pressure of the dominant constituent is nearly an order of magnitude greater than the next constituent.  This justifies our assumption of a single species atmosphere, with the exception of immediately after Moon formation - where partial pressures of the dominant constituents were summed.  The choice of a komatiite magma to explore equilibrium vapor pressures is a reasonable approximation given the compositional similarity to the TWM [8] composition and LPUM [9] composition. The surface temperature profile for our model is based upon radiative contributions from the early Sun, the hot Lunar Magma Ocean that is believed to have existed for ~100 million years after the Moon forming impact and contributions from the radiative flux of the Earth during that same period.  After the Moon forming impact, the Earth may have had a radiating temperature that peaked at ~2500K [10].   We approximate the surface temperature by adding the flux contribution of the Earth as a function of the angle away from the subEarth point to the surface liquidus temperature of the magma  (~1675K for an LPUM composition [11]).  The solidifying LMO's surface temperature is set at 1500 and 1000K for the last two cases.  Finally, we include a radiative contribution of the Sun equivalent to ~70% of the present day value. We consider the effect of the apparent angular size of the Earth as viewed from the moon by mapping the Lambertian temperature profile of a point source to an Earthside region of the moon extended by the apparent angular size of the Earth.  This roughly takes into account the penumbra effect of illumination due to the angular size of the host.  We also consider the effect of the changing orbital distance of the Moon from the Earth by varying the distance of the two bodies as a function of time and by choosing appropriate radiating temperatures for the Early Earth [10, 13].  We account for the the approximate times it took the Moon's orbit to tidally evolve to a different distance from the Earth [4, 12].  The orbital distance of the Moon as a function of time and the corresponding radiating temperature of the Earth is given in Table 1.  Our models correspond to a range of times spanning from right after accretion of the Moon to a time where most of the LMO had crystallized.  Table 1: Model Input ParametersEarth-Moon Distance (Re)Time after Moon formation (Kyr)Teff for Earth (K)3 0.001 25004 0.1 24506 1.4 190010 39 70015 555 255~25 >104 255~40 >105 2551242.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
   Model Results: While each model contains specific information regarding the Moon's atmosphere at a particular time, there are some general trends that are evident from the suite of models.  Figure 1 below illustrates the change in a number of atmospheric parameters as function of time.  The parameters are the atmospheric pressure of the Moon at the sub-Earth point and the difference between that pressure and the pressure at the terminator, the same quantities for the atmospheric temperature, and the horizontal velocity of the atmosphere at the 'Terminator'.      Figure 1 A critical takeaway is that the Moon possessed a moderate Earthside atmosphere during the first 10,000 years post-formation - a time that corresponds to the period where the radiative flux of the Earth was much higher than present day.  Immediately after the Moon's formation the atmosphere had significant amounts of Na and SiO in its' atmosphere and experienced supersonic horizontal winds which advected material towards the anti-Earthside portion of the Moon where the atmosphere was several orders of magnitude thinner.  By the time the Moon had tidally evolved to a distance about twice the fluid Roche limit, it possessed a moderate Earthside atmosphere dominated by Na that still exhibited a strong Earth to anti-Earthside temperature gradient and supersonic horizontal winds in that direction.  Once the Moon reached distances from the Earth that are about a quarter of the present day separation and larger, the atmosphere condensed.  What remained until complete atmospheric collapse was a thin nearly uniform pressure atmosphere that still possessed fairly strong (but not supersonic) Earth to anti-Earthside winds. Implications for Future Work:  The characteristics of the evolving Moon's atmosphere may have important ramifications for the Moon's evolution and current physical state.  At minimum, there existed a strong Earthside to anti-Earthside force in the first thousands of years after the Moon's formation - the supersonic horizontal winds of the atmosphere.  This may have impacted deposition profiles (though temperatures on the Earthside were barely ever high enough to vaporize refractories such as Al and Ca) and perhaps more importantly may have enabled surface movement on the magma ocean from the Earthside to antiEarthside.  The existence of a significant pressure asymmetry as a function of distance from the Earthside may also validate that the Earthside of the Moon was subject to additional insulation that may have resulted in higher magma temperatures.  A significant amount of compositionally dependent mass was also transported during the existence of the thicker atmospheres early in the Moon's history - this may have had some influence on compositional asymmetries.  Additionally, a significant proportion of the sodium budget of the surface layers of the LMO was vaporized to form the longest-lived moderately thick early atmosphere that existed on the Moon.  Given the low surface gravity of the Moon and intense radiation the atmosphere was subject to, this may be have lead to preferential depletion of Sodium from the nearside surface.   Finally, the early Moon may be the most accessible solar system analogue for what are likely to be the first well characterized rocky exoplanets in the near future.  The compositional and crustal asymmetries that paint a picture of the Moon's past may also help us glimpse the physical state of those worlds today.   References: [1] Ingersoll A. P. et al. (1985) Icarus, 64, 375-390. [2] Jutzi, M. & Asphaug, E. (2011) Nature 476, 69-72 [3] Loper, D. E. & Werner, C. L. (2002) J. Geophys. Res. 107, 5046 [4] Wasson, J. T. & Warren, P. H. (1980) Icarus 44, 752-771 [5] Roy, A. et al. (2014) ApJL 788, L42 [6] Castan, T. and Menou, K. (2011) ApJL, 743, L36 [7] Miguel, Y. et al. (2011) ApJL, 742, L19 [8] Taylor, S. R. (1982) Planetary Scienca. A lunar perspective. LPI [9] Longhi J. (2006) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 70, 5919-5934 [10] Zahnle, K. et al. (2007) Space Science Reviews 129, 35-78 [11] Elardo, S. M. et al. (2011) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 75, 3024-3045 [12] Bills, B. G. and Ray, R. D. (1999) GRL, 26, 3045-3048 [13] Zahnle, K. J. et al. (2015) EPSL, 427, 74-821242.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
