1274.PDF
C3 (C-CUBED): A CONSORTIUM OF INSTRUMENTS AND RESOURCES IN CHICAGO FOR NASABASED RESEARCH AND EDUCATION. N. Dauphas1,2,3, A. M. Davis1,2,3, R. Yokochi1, R. A. Mendybaev1, P. R. Heck1,3, T. Stephan1,3, M. J. Pellin1,2,4, F. M. Richter1,3, 1Department of the Geophysical Sciences and 2Enrico Fermi Institute, The University of Chicago (dauphas@uchicago.edu); 3Robert A. Pritzker Center for Meteoritics and Polar Studies, The Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago; 4Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439.   Introduction: As analytical capabilities improve, it becomes possible to analyze smaller samples with better precision, allowing to make optimum use of precious meteorites as well as unique samples returned by spacecraft missions, such as lunar rocks by the Apollo and Luna programs, solar wind by Genesis, cometary dust by Stardust, and asteroidal samples by Hayabusa. More asteroidal samples will be returned to Earth in the next 10 years by the OSIRIS-Rex and Hayabusa 2 spacecrafts, which calls for further investment in analytical capabilities to ensure that a solid base of labs will be available to do the measurements that these missions call for. The Chicago Center for Cosmochemistry (C3) is a consortium of PI-lead research laboratories at the University of Chicago, the Field Museum, and Argonne National Laboratory whose main focus is in the analysis of meteorites, returned samples, and their constituents. As a premier educational institution, The University of Chicago provides training to undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of meteoritics and cosmochemistry. To accomplish those goals, a large range of instruments are used that were mostly purchased and built through the support of NASA and NSF. These comprise, at the University of Chicago: (1) a new FIB/ FE-SEM with a powerful suite of x-ray analytical accessories; (2) a multicollector Nu Noblesse noble gas mass spectrometer; (3) a Neptune MC-ICPMS associated with a state-of-the-art clean laboratory; (4) a Resonance Ionization Mass Spectrometer; (5) an experimental lab to prepare standards and simulate high Tlow P conditions relevant to the formation of the Solar System. At the Field Museum, there are a world-class meteorite collection, an SEM, an iCAP Q LA-ICPMS, and a sample preparation and cosmochemistry laboratory. Except for the two SEMs,  all other instruments deliver unique capabilities for analysis, but require significant training in their use and sample preparation. Such training is uniquely available within the C3 environment.  Below, we present in more detail the analytical capabilities of the C3 instruments, all of which are already available for external use on a collaborative basis and some of which could be part of a newly defined facility that would provide a palette of analytical options, from routine SEM measurements to more dedicated research instrumentation. Laser ablation MC-ICPMS lab for high precision isotopic and elemental analyses: A Thermo Neptune Multi-Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) is installed in the Origins Lab. It has been upgrade with a Jet Pump, bringing it to specs with the Neptune Plus. Much of the art and time in MC-ICPMS measurements is in sample preparation and wet chemistry. Sample preparation and element purification is done in a large, state-of-the-art clean lab associated with the mass spectrometer. An automated Pneumatic Fluoropolymer HPLC system (patent pending) was developed that streamlines sample processing and improves chemical separation purity and yield. Approximately half of the time on the MC-ICPMS instrument is devoted to objectives relevant to NASA, such as rock dating, cosmic ray irradiation history, chemical and isotopic characterization of extraterrestrial samples. A significant fraction is done through collaboration with outside users. Many students at all levels are involved in this research. The instrument can also be connected to an Excimer laser ablation system. CHILI, for isotopic and chemical analyses of small samples: The Chicago Instrument for Laser Ionization (CHILI) is a resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS) instrument with unprecedented analytical capabilities. Designed for high lateral resolution (~10 nm), high sensitivity (~40 % useful yield), it is especially suited for the analysis of isotopes of up to three elements simultaneously in µm- and sub-µmsized samples [3]. After several years of designing and building CHILI, the first analyses of natural samples, Sr, Zr, and Ba isotope studies of presolar SiC grains, were presented last year [4]. It is expected that CHILI will reach its design specifications within this year, and Fe and Ni isotopic measurements on natural samples are underway. CHILI is a unique instrument with capabilities not duplicated at any other cosmochemistry laboratory world-wide. At Argonne National Laboratory, there are two older-generation RIMS instruments, CHARISMA and SARISA, which have been used for presolar grain measurement and analysis of Genesis samples. 1274.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Noble gas lab: A multi-collector Noblesse noble gas mass spectrometer (Nu Instruments) is equipped with a dedicated gas purification vacuum line, and a resistance furnace that is used for releasing noble gases from meteorite samples. This facility can analyze noble gas abundances and isotopic compositions at high sensitivity and accuracy. Experimental lab for modeling evaporation and crystallization processes and for preparation of standards for high precision isotopic analyses: Currently, the lab is equipped with a high-temperature vacuum furnace and one-atmosphere vertical DelTech and Carbolite furnaces. The vacuum furnace is a unique facility that is not replicated anywhere else in NASA or university laboratories in the US. It is used to model chemical and isotopic fractionations during evaporation of refractory CAI-like materials under low-pressure conditions. We are also planning to convert the Carbolite furnace into a low-pressure hydrogen furnace to better reproduce solar nebula conditions. One of our DelTech furnaces is equipped with a gasmixing apparatus to model melting and crystallization processes in a wide range of redox conditions.  The furnaces are also used to prepare synthetic standards of glasses and minerals that are used as: a) matrix correction standards with the same isotopic but different chemical compositions, as required for high precision isotopic measurements using laser-ablation MC-ICPMS and SIMS instruments [1, 2]; b) standards with the same chemical but varying isotopic compositions to check for possible instrumental mass fractionation effects in some machines. FIB-SEM at the University of Chicago for petrographic, chemical characterization and sample preparation: A Tescan LYRA3 focused ion beam (FIB)/field emission scanning electron (FE-SEM) microscope was installed in 2015. It is equipped with an Orsay Physics Cobra Ga+ ion gun, a Schottky field emission gun, a secondary electron detector, a TV-rate backscattered electron detector, in-column secondary and backscattered electron detectors and a STEM (scanning transmission electron microscopy detector). FIB liftout is enabled with an Oxford OmniProbe 400 micromanipultator and OmniGIS II gas injector capable of depositing C, Pt, or W and etching with water or XeF2. The instrument also has several microanalysis accessories, including two XMax 80 mm2 silicon drift x-ray detectors, one Wave 500 wavelength-dispersive spectrometer, and a NordlysMax2 electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) detector, all from Oxford Instruments and run under their AZtec platform. The instrument is capable of a wide variety of sample preparation and analysis tasks, including liftout and thinning of samples for TEM, fast chemical mapping, quantitative chemical analysis and determination of crystal structure in both reflection and transmission modes. This facility was largely funded by NASA and is operated as a facility open to users within and outside the University of Chicago, with priority being given to NASAsupported research. Meteorite Collection, Cosmochemistry Lab, SEM, and Q ICPMS at the Field Museum for sample preparation, petrographic and chemical characterization: The Field Museum houses the largest meteorite collection at a private research institution. It is conveniently accessible in particular for Chicago-based researchers, and a portion of the collection that comprised the research collections of E. Anders and R. N. Clayton remains in residence at the University of Chicago for ready access for teaching purposes. A cosmochemistry laboratory allows sample preparation for different analytical techniques, including SEM, RIMS, SIMS, and atom probe in a clean environment.  The Zeiss Evo 60 SEM is equipped with a state-ofthe-art X-Max silicon-drift EDS detector and AZtec software from Oxford Instruments. The setup allows large area mapping with phase identification, automatic particle analysis and quantitative elemental analysis with a large set of standards.  In addition, a state-of-the-art Thermo Fisher Scientific iCAP Q ICMPS was recently acquired with NSF- and private funding and can be used for trace element analysis of extraterrestrial samples. It is equipped with laser ablation, an adaptable chamber for oversized objects, and a nanoparticle analysis system.   References: [1] Janney P. E. et al. (2011) Chem. Geol., 281, 26–40. [2] Knight et al. (2009) GCA, 73, 6390–6401. [3] Stephan T. et al. (2014) LPS 45, #2242. [4] Stephan T. et al. (2015) LPS 46, #2825.  1274.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
