 CRATERING ON CERES: THE PUZZLE OF THE MISSING LARGE CRATERS. S. Marchi1, D. P. O'Brien2, P. Schenk3, R. Fu4, A. Ermakov5, M. C. De Sanctis6, E. Ammannito7, D. A. Williams8, S. C. Mest2, C. A. Raymond9, C. T. Russell7;  1Southwest Research Institute (marchi@boulder.swri.edu), Boulder, CO; 2Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ; 3Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX; 4Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Palisades, NY; 5Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA; 6Istituto Nazionale d'Astrofisica, Rome, Italy;  7University of  California,  Los Angeles,  CA;  8Arizona State University, Tempe,  AZ; 9JPL,  Caltech, Pasadena, CA. Introduction: Data acquired by the Dawn spacecraft revealed a portrait of Ceres's surface that, in many ways, challenges our preconceived expectations. Ceres is the largest object in the main belt of asteroids.  As  such,  extensive  ground-based  and  Hubble Space Telescope observations have provided a wealth of information [e.g. 1,2] Ceres' surface has a very low albedo (~9 %) [2], while the lack of significant absorptions  bands  at  visible  and  near-infrared  wavelengths points toward a more pristine composition [e.g., 3,4] if compared to many siblings in the asteroid belt (and notably to the large asteroid Vesta). A certain resemblance with carbonaceous chondrite meteorites has also been noted [e.g., 1,3,4]. Furthermore, the relatively low bulk density (~2.16 g/cm3) implies a significant fraction of bulk water ice (20-40%). Much of this water could be localized to a higher volume fraction in an outer icerich shell as a result of differentiation [e.g.,  5,6].  Finally, Ceres is expected to have formed at the dawn of the solar system, and thus its surface could potentially record vestiges of its ancient collisional evolution. The current  relatively warm surface  (at  2.86  AU the  day time temperature is in the range 180-210 K), and the inferred ice-rich outer shell, however, have been suggested  to  result  in  widespread  topography relaxation over geological timescales hampering the potential for the ancient  craters  to  be  retained  [7].  Thus,  prior  to Dawn arrival, Ceres' surface was expected either to be almost depleted of craters (if the prediction of an icerich shell was correct), or chock-full of craters (if the prediction of an ice-rich shell was wrong). Dawn's  observations  have  defeated  both  expectations in ways we were not able to foreseen. Here we present  global  cratering  data  acquired  by  the  Dawn spacecraft  and discuss the implications of these findings in terms of past collisional evolution. Global crater record: We have used Survey and High Altitude Mapping Orbit data (at  a resolution of 400 and 140 m/px, respectively) to perform a global crater  mapping. Here we will focus on craters  larger that 20 km, as shown in Figure 1. A number of intriguing features emerge (more details in [8]). A first important result is the presence of heavily cratered terrains, found predominantly in the northern hemisphere,  although heavily craters terrains are also found at low latitudes. This observation tells us that topographic relaxation due to the presence of an ice-rich shell  has  to  be  limited.  Furthermore,  an  improved model  of  topographic  relaxation  has  constrained  the fraction of ice to be <30% in the outer shell [9]. A second major finding is the lack of larger craters. The largest well recognizable craters are 260-280 km in diameter.  Although large scale  topography relaxes faster  than  at  small  scales,  the  lack  of  large  craters seems at odds with the presence of heavily cratered terrains and the inferred low volume fraction of ice in the outer shell. Furthermore, the smaller asteroid Vesta has two  craters  larger  than  400  km  (Rheasilvia  and Veneneia; [10]). Figure 1: Global distribution of craters larger than 20 km in diameter. The basemap is a Mollweide projection of a Survey global mosaic. Note the concentration of craters in the northern hemisphere and close to the equator at longitudes ~180 deg (center of the picture). Interestingly, the spatial density of craters is locally reduced  by  the  presence  of  the  largest  well-visible craters, Kerwan and Yalode (Figure 2). Also, the spatial extent of these low crater density terrains seems to extend far beyond the continuous ejecta.  A preliminary analysis of superposed craters to these terrains result in an age younger than ~1-2 Ga. These large impact structures are remarkable in that they exhibit widely different morphologies (Figure 2), despite their similar sizes. At  face  value,  this  result  could  suggest  significant crustal  heterogeneities  or  that  the  impact  conditions were different (e.g., impact speed).   Figure 2: A close-in view (based on Survey data) of the largest craters observed on Ceres: ~280 km Kerwan (A), and ~267 km Yalode (C) craters. The latter is cut by the later formation of a large crater,  ~170 km Urvara (B), which also exhibits a remarkable morphology although it is smaller than Kerwan and Yalode. Images are not to scale. The color map represents a Survey digital terrain model whose range is approximately [-6,+8] km with respect to the 482x482x446 reference ellipsoid. Implications  for  the  lack  of  a  Ceres  asteroid family: Many large  asteroids  (4  out  of  14  asteroids larger than 250 km in diameter; [11]) have dynamical families. They are the result of either catastrophic collisions (e.g., Themis), or cratering events (e.g., Vesta). It has  been  a lingering puzzle  why Ceres,  whose cross section far exceeds those of all other  large asteroids, does  not  have  a  family  [12].  Our  preliminary  collisional model predicts that under standard assumptions [13],  about  10-12  craters  larger  than 400 km should have formed. These craters are potentially capable to form a significant family (as for the crater Rheasilvia on Vesta).  Earlier  investigations have speculated  that the lack of a Ceres family could be due to an ice-rich compositions of the ejected fragments which would not survive for billions of years [11,12], but this conclusion seems incompatible with the inferred relatively low ice content of the outer shell of Ceres [9]. Thus, two scenarios  emerge.  Either  Ceres  managed  to  avoid  large collisions  (as  perhaps  indicated  by the  lack  of  large craters), or those collisions happened early on -possibly prior to the late heavy bombardment- and the resulting family(s) are now fully dispersed [14] and the corresponding craters are altered beyond recognition. The first scenario seems untenable on the basis of the expected collisional evolution, thus we tentatively propose the second scenario as the most likely explanation. Additional insights from Ceres' overall shape: A closer  inspection  at  the  topography reveals  the  presence  of  a  few  large  scale  shallow  depressions,  the largest of which measures about 700 km across. This is an  indication  that  large  collisions  might  have  taken place.  Given  the  high  level  of  superposed  cratering, this also supports  the view that  these collisions took place in a remote past, thus compatible with the lack of an obvious asteroid family. Furthermore,  an  analysis  of  the  topography "power" (topography amplitude as function of the spatial wavelength) further suggests the surface of Ceres is remarkably flat a spatial scales of ~150 km or larger [9],  compatible  with  the  lack  of  large,  deep  impact structures. Putting the pieces of the puzzle together: Thanks to the Dawn mission we can now put into focus a number of key observations about Ceres. In summary: (i)  The  presence  of  highly  cratered  terrains  on Ceres appears  to be compatible with main belt collisional models, which in turn indicates a relatively low ice content for the outer shell. (ii) The apparent lack of large craters (>300 km in diameter) is in contrast with collisional models. However, if one consider the presence of a few large subdued depressions (possible ancient impact structures), and  the  flatness  of  the  topography  at  large  spatial scales, it seems possible that these ancient craters are now largely relaxed and partially obliterated by subsequent cratering. (iii) The fact that large collisions took place in the ancient past could explain why Ceres does not exhibit a well-defined asteroid family. In fact, families older that 3-4 Ga are unlikely to be detected due to the significant orbital dispersion of family members. (iv) The largest visible and young craters (Kerwan, Yalode)  are  probably too  small  to  produce  a  visible family,  as  the size  of  the largest  ejected  fragment is likely below or comparable with current detection limits (~ 3 km). References: [1] Rivkin et al., Icarus 185 , 2006; [2] Li et  al.,  Icarus  182,  2006;  [3]  Johnson and Fanale, JGR 78, 1973; [4] McCord and Gaffey, Science 186, 1974;  [5]  McCord  and  Sotin,  JGRE  110,  2005;  [6] Castillo-Rogez  and  McCord,  Icarus  205,  2010;  [7] Bland, Icarus 226, 2013; [8] Hiesinger et al., submitted, 2016; [9] Fu et al., AGU Fall Meeting, 2015; [10] Marchi et  al.,  Science 336,  2012;  [11] Rivkin et  al., Icarus 243, 2014; [12] Milani et al., Icarus 239,  2014; [13] O'Brien et al., PSS 103, 2014; [14] Brasil et al., Icarus 266, 2016. 