1331.PDF
MARE-FORMING LAVA FLOWS ON THE MOON REVEALED BY DETRENDED LOLA TOPOGRAPHY.  M. A. Kreslavsky1,2, J. W. Head3, G. A. Neumann4, M. T. Zuber5, D. E. Smith5,  1Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, 95064 USA, mkreslav@ucsc.edu; 2MExLab, Moscow State University of Geodesy and Cartography (MIIGAiK), Moscow, Russia; 3Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02912, USA; 4Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA; 5Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.  Introduction:  Despite a great advance in computer data processing, visual inspection remains the main analysis tool in geomorphology. Laser altimeter data are, in a sense, too precise for visual perception. For example, the ranging precision of Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) [1,2] onboard LRO is about 10 cm, and the topographic amplitudes on the Moon reach ~10 km, which gives an impressive dynamic range of ~105; without special effort this accuracy of the data could remain unused. To fully actualize the great potential of the LOLA data in sensing low-amplitude gently sloping topographic features we apply a special detrending algorithm, which enables visualization of subtle topographic features in maria. This technique provides important new information on previously unrecognized lava flow textures. We found that for features with the smallest spatial dimension of a kilometer and larger, the detrended topography supersedes imaging at low Sun illumination. The same detrending algorithm had been successfully applied to martian topography [3]. Detrending procedure.  As source data for detrended topographic maps, we use LOLA [1,2] Gridded Data Records from the PDS in simple cylindrical projection for the whole lunar surface sampled at 64 pixels per degree, which corresponds to 474 m pixel size at the equator, and in polar azimuthal stereographic projection for both high-latitude regions sampled at 400 m per pixel. The chosen sampling provides the highest possible map resolution at which the majority of pixels obtained from actual LOLA ranging measurements rather than by interpolation. The detrended topography at each pixel was calculated as a difference between the actual elevation at this pixel and the median elevation of all pixels within a circular window centered at this pixel. The window size defines the spatial scale of the features that are considered as a global trend and thus are subject to removal. We produced maps with a 5, 10, and 15 pixel window radii, which is equivalent to about 5, 10, and 15 km diameter window at the equator; examples in Fig. 2 and 3 are for 10 km diameter window. The filtering algorithm used is similar to high-pass linear filters, however, we use the median in a sliding window to calculate the trend surface, while the linear filters use the weighted arithmetic mean. Any reasonable detrending algorithm, including both our medianbased and the traditional linear filters, filters out topographic features much larger than the window, preserves topographic features much smaller than the window, and distorts features comparable to the window in size. In a sense, our algorithm produce less distortion than linear filters, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This makes the result of the median-based detrending much better for visual perception than the result of a linear high-pass filter. This was the principal reason for our choice of the median-based detrending. Any detrending algorithm significantly distorts features comparable to the window size. Due to the non-linear nature of the median-based detrending procedure, distortions of window-scale features are more complicated, than for linear high-pass filter. Typical lunar highlands have many craters and other topographic features in the "harmful" 5- 20 km size range. As a result, detrending topography of lunar highlands is not as useful as in the regionally flatter maria, where detrending reveals subtle features unrecognizable otherwise. Mare flows: The most impressive features seen in the detrended topography maps are patterns of lava flows forming mare surfaces. Three huge partly overlapping lobate flows are very well seen in the central part of Mare Imbrium (Y1, Y2, Y3 in Fig. 2). They have been identified [4] with low-sun images that revealed the subtle topographic steps outlining the flows, except their east-west-oriented segments. In Fig. 2 the outlines are seen very well, the emplacement sequence (Y1, Y2, Y3) can be established unambiguously, and it is clearly seen that these flows are the last flows in the Imbrium center. They represent the latest stage of Imbrium basin infill. In addition to previously known flows Y1, Y2, Y3, the detrended topography map reveals other previously unknown flows [5]. The arrow in Fig. 3 shows a narrower flow that predates Y1. It has a kilometer wide, a few meters deep linear depression along its axis, which we interpret as a lava channel.  Volcanic plains in the W part of the scene (X in Fig. 2) have a very distinctive pattern. Its characteristic topographic amplitude is 1 - 3 m, and a characteristic spatial scale is several kilometers and larger. It appears to be formed by a hierarchic dendritic system of subtle ridges that we interpret as a lava distributary system and a compound flow field [5-7]. This pattern reflects a specific lava emplacement style and therefore eruption 1331.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
characteristics that are different from flows Y1-3. Flows X unambiguously predate flows Y.  Fig. 3 provides another example of different mareforming volcanic styles in the W part of Mare Serenitatis. The long arrows show a boundary between a smooth unit in the E part of the scene and a unit with a specific pattern with 1 - 2 m topographic amplitude in the W part. This pattern might be similar to pattern X (Fig. 2) in Mare Imbrium with a shorter spatial scale and a lower topographic amplitude. Here we again see clear evidence for volcanic units of different emplacement style and therefore different eruption characteristics. The detrended topography maps are also good for systematic identifying low volcanic constructs, domes and shields, starting from a few km in diameter. The maps the have advantage of uninform, illuminationindependent detection. In the NW part of Fig. 3, two pairs of arrows point at two large gently sloping volcanic shields. Their centers are spatially associated with narrow linear rilles, images of their central parts reveal a few small steep cones and pits that might represent vents. The north-western shield is rather well seen in the low-sun images, while the south-eastern one is hardly detectable. References: [1] Smith D. E. et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev. 150, 209-241. [2] Smith D. E. et al. (2010) GRL 37, L18204. [3] Kreslavsky M. A. & Head J. W. (2001) JGR 107, 5121, DOI: 10.1029/ 2001JE001831. [4] Schaber, G. (1973) Proc. 4th LPSC, 73-92. [5] Qiao, L. et al. (2016) LPSC 47, this volume. [6] Wilson. L. and Head, J. (2015) Icarus, in press. [7] Head, J. and Wilson. L. (2015) Icarus, in review.      Fig. 1. Artificial topography consisting of 7 similar parabolic domes rendered as artificially shaded relief (a) and results of application of the linear high-pass filter (b) and median detrending procedure (c) rendered as a grayscale map, brighter shades denoting higher elevations. The grayscale stretch is the same in (b) and (c). White circle shows the detrending window.  Fig. 2. Portion of the detrended topography map covering the southern part of Mare Imbrium, centered at 35ºN, 19ºW, and stretched to +/- 10 m amplitude. The detrending window is shown with a circle. Arrow shows a linear depression, probably a lava channel. X, Y1, Y2, Y3 mark lava flows. Craters: C, Carlini, H, Helicon, V, Le Verrier.  Fig. 3. Portion of the detrended topography map covering western half of Mare Serenitatis, centered at 27ºN, 14ºE, and stretched to +/- 10 m amplitude. The detrending window is shown with a circle. Two pairs of short arrows show two low shields. Long arrows mark boundary between volcanic plane units with different textures.  Acknowledgemets:  We acknowledge support from the NASA LRO program and the NASA SSERVI grant to Brown University. All technical work on data analysis was carried out by MAK at MIIGAiK under Russian Science Foundation support, project 14-22-00197. 1331.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
