 PROPERTIES OF DARK MANTLES IN LUNAR CRATER ALPHONSUS DEDUCED FROM LROC WAC PHOTOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS.  Y. G.  Shkuratov1,  V. V.  Korokhin1,  M. A.  Ivanov2,3,  V. G.  Kaydash1, L. V. Rohacheva1, G. P. Marchenko1, and G. Videen4, 1Institute of Astronomy, V.N. Karazin National University, 35 Sumska St, Kharkiv, 61022, Ukraine, 2GEOKHI, Kosygin St., 19, Moscow, 3Moscow State University of Geodesy and Cartography (MiiGAIK), 4Space Science Institute, 4750 Walnut St. Suite 205, Boulder CO 80301, USA. Introduction:  The pre-Nectaruian, floor-fractured crater  Alphonsus [3,4]  (13ºS,  357ºE,  108 km) shows several  dark  mantles  on  its  floor  that  usually  are interpreted  as  pyroclastic  deposits  [1,5,6].  Figure  1 shows  a  normal  albedo  map  (mosaic)  including  the crater Alphonsus that was calculated (see below) using several  hundreds  of  individual  LROC  WAC images acquired  at  λ = 689  nm.  The  crater  is  optically heterogeneous.  In  particular,  dark  mantles  are prominent  features.  We  apply  LROC  WAC data  to compare optical roughness [2, 8] of the dark spots with the surrounding areas. Figure 1. The distribution of the normal albedo A0 Geology of the crater: Eight material units make up  Alphonsus  crater  (Fig.  2)  and  its  immediate surroundings.  Highland  materials  (undifferentiated, unit h) represent the background terrain. To the west of Alphonsus,  local  to regional lows are  filled by mare materials (unit m) that represent the eastern edge of the Mare Nubium lava fill. The oldest units inside crater Alphonsus are materials on the wall (unit  wa) and the floor (unit fla) of the crater. Materials on the walls are those of the highlands re-exposed after the Alphonsus impact.  Morphologically,  materials  on  the  floor  are smooth  plains.  Ejecta  from  a  crater  outside  of Alphonsus (unit  re) overlay the medial portion of the Alphonsus floor.  The most likely parent crater of the ejecta  is  crater  Arzachel  (~100  km  in  diameter) immediately  to  the  south  of  Alphonsus.  Crater Alphonsus belongs to the class of the floor-fractured craters [3,4]. Graben within crater Alphonsus (unit  g) are concentrated in the eastern half of the floor where these structures form several N-S-oriented branches. In the southern portion of the floor, graben are oriented in ESE-WMW direction. The graben in their medial parts are ~0.5-1.0 km wide and tens to a few hundred meters deep.  Graben  cut  walls,  floor,  and  remote  ejecta materials. Figure 2.  Geological map of the crater Alphonsus The  dark  mantling  deposits  (unit  dm)  with diameters ranging from~3 to 12 km occur on the floor of Alphonsus. All of them are closely associated with the systems of graben and postdate them. Most of the dark deposits are concentrated in the eastern part of the floor  (Fig.  2).  Circular  or  slightly  elongated depressions  usually  occur  in  the  center  of  the  dark mantles  and  likely  represent  the  deposit  vents.  The mantles  have  an  equidimensional  shape  that  is approximately symmetric relative to the apparent vents. The dark mantling materials are usually interpreted as pyroclastic deposits [1,5,6]. Small (tens of meters to ~2 km in diameter) craters with  visually  brighter  ejecta  represent  the  youngest materials  exposed  inside  and  outside  of  crater Alphonsus. Several tens of small fresher craters occur within the dark mantles. Ejecta from these craters may represent either materials excavated from beneath the mantles or simply less mature, hence brighter, regolith. Excluding  young  craters,  the  Alphonsus  floor surface is rather old, since it does not show variations of the parameter OMAT that characterizes the maturity degree of the lunar regolith [7]. In particular, the dark  mantles mentioned above are not seen in the OMAT map shown in Fig. 3. Figure 3. The distribution of the parameter OMAT [7] Optical  roughness:  We  study Alphonsus  using LRO optical  measurements to confirm the hypothesis that  the  dark  mantles  can  be  related  to  pyroclastic deposits. To characterize the optical roughness, we use the following new approximation of lunar phase curves [8]: 0 exp( )A rha- , where α is the phase angle and the parameters  A0,  η,  and  ρ are,  respectively,  the normal albedo,  total  slope  and  bend  of  phase  curve.  These parameters were calculated for each point of the lunar surface in the scene using the mean-square method and tens of LROC WAC images acquired at different phase angles from a range of ~9-80º; the average number of points for the phase-curve approximation is about 140. A detailed description of the processing is presented in [2, 8]. Maps of the parameters are shown in Figs. 1, 4, and 5. The normal albedo map shows that the crater floor material and surrounding surface have almost the same brightness,  which  implies  equal  abundance  of chromophore elements such as Fe and Ti (Fig. 1). As can be seen, the map of  η demonstrates a very close correlation with  A0 (cf. Figs. 1 and 4). This indicates the total slope of the phase curve depends not only on the surface roughness, but on the albedo as well [9]. Moreover, we found that the parameter η depends also on the wavelength λ. In contrast, the parameter  does not depend on  λ and very slightly correlates with the albedo  [8].  This  means  that  the  bend  relates  to  the surface structure. Low values of ρ correspond to areas with higher  bend of  phase curves.  The dark  mantles show bent  phase  curves  (Fig.  5).  Thus,  the  surface roughness responsible for the shadows at large phase angles (rock fields), is lower for the dark mantles. This is consistent with the pyroclastic origin of the mantles because the pyroclastic  deposits  may smooth out  the preexisting surface. Unlike the dark mantles, the young craters (Fig.  5) show low bend in spite of the higher albedo. This is because the ejecta of such craters are much rougher than the surrounding terrains. Figure 4. The distribution of the parameter η that describes general slope of phase curves Figure 5. The distribution of the parameter ρ that describes bend of phase curves References:  [1]  Head  J.  and  Wilson  L.  (1979) Proc. LPSC 10th, LPI Houston, 2861. [2] Korokhin V. et al. (2014)  PSS,  92, 65. [3] Schultz P. (1976)  The Moon 15, 241. [4] Jozwiak L. et al. (2012) JGR, 117, E11005, 2012. [5] Head J. (1974) Proc. LPSC 5th, 207. [6]  Heiken  G.  et  al.  (1974)  GCActa 38,  1703.  [7] Lucey  P.  et  al.  (1995)  Science,  268,  1150.  [8] Korokhin V. et al. (2016) LPSC 47th, 1248 (this issue). [9]  Hapke  B.  (1993)  Theory  of  reflectance  and emittance spectroscopy, Cambridge Univ. Press, 450 p. 