1346.PDF
ONE-WAY DOPPLER OBSERVATION FOR NEW HORIZON USING RADIO ASTRONOMICAL STATION  J. S. Ping1, N. C. Jian2, W. X. Li1,3, T. Y. Zhang4, J. H. Zhang5, M. Zhu6 and Mingyuan Wang1, 1Key Lab. of Lunar and Deep Space Exploration Research, National Astronomical Observatories of CAS, Datun Rd. 20A, Beijing, China; 2Shanghai Astronomical Observatory, CAS, Nandan Rd. 80, Shanghai, China; 3Xinjiang Astronomical Observatory, Urumqi, China; 4Dongnan University, Sipailou, Nanjing, China; 5State Key Laboratory of Astronautic Dynamics, Xi’an, China; 6Beijing Normal University, Xinjiekou Waidajie No. 19, Beijing, China. Contact: jsping@bao.ac.cn  Introduction:  After about nine years of free flying, the New Horizons deep spacecraft which was launched by NASA in 2006, fly-byed Pluto on July 14 ,2015, and became the first spacecraft which has traveled to Pluto. Taking this unique opportunity, a joint planetary radio science research team from Chinese Academy Of Sciences set up Radio Science Receivers at Tianma station of Shanghai Astronomical Observatory and at Jiamuse VLBI Station of Heilongjiang to observe the carrier wave (CW) radio signal from New Horizons, by means of 1-way open loop doppler observation. The two stations have been constructed for astronomical radio observation and for S/C VLBI OD observation. The observables include the Doppler frequency and the phase information of the downlink CW signal. We discussed the resolution evaluation based on the measurement results. Signal Identification:  The two ~65 meter scale VLBI antenna were constructed during 2010~2013 at Shanghai and Jiamusi for two scientific objectives, VLBI positioning of the future Chinese Martian mission and radio astronomical observation like pulsar TOA. New Horizon 1-way down link mode [2] at Xband give us a chance to test how far the new antenna can track in the solar system (see Figue 1).  Orignally, the X-band 1-way tracking of radio science experiments of New Horizon has been designed to measure the mass and then the mean density of Pluto. Figure 2 shows the gravities on S/C due to large bodies in the Solar sytem, during 1 month fly- by period.   Figure 1, Simple structure diagram of our solar system. During the fly-by observation experiment, we pointed the antenna to Pluto directly, by using the JPL/NASA DE430/LE430 lunar and planetary ephemeris was used. The main beam of the antenna at X-band can cover all the pass. After checking the antenna pointing accuracy, we luckly found the carrier signal of New Horizon. See Figure 3.  Figure 2, gravities on New Horizon during 1 month fly-by in m/s2.  Figure 3, CW of New Horizon by VLBI site.  Dopper Observation: The method introduced by Ping et al. (2016) was adapted to measure the open loop 1-way Doppler. A H-maser clock supplied the local standard reference frequency. Also, we used GNSS satellite common view method to do the time synchronization between the VLBI station and an  international  center of universal time serve, with an accuracy of ~50 nano-second.  Geodetic GNSS receiver and meterological recorder had been usemodelling and calibrating the atmospheric and ionospheric effects in 1346.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
the observation measurements.  Using blind observation mode, our planetary radio science receiver recorded the 1sps Doppler of the identified CW successfully. See Figure 4.  The 1sps Doppler had a random noise of ~30~35mHz. See Figure 5.  If we intergrate the result to 60~100seconds per point, the Doppler will have a very small random noise of 1~4mHz.   Figure 4, Doppler observation result at a VLBI site.  Figure 5, 1way Doppler residual or random noise.  Discussion:  Several passes of Doppler measurements for New Horizon were obtained by our VLBI stations during the Pluto fly-by period. We also tried to remove the effects involved in the Doppler data due to the troposphere and ionosphere of the Earth by means of co-located GNSS method. Research group are trying to calibrate the onboard frequency, and then to do POD by using the data.  Additionally, the strong acceleration signal in the data can be used to estimate the mass of Pluto, however, not easy to estimate the mass of its satellite. Using this open loop 1-way Doppler observation method, we tested the Doppler receiving ability of our VLBI station. The above results show that our stations can support an international deep space mission even beyond Pluto.  And, we hope to share our station time and experience with Pluto radio science team during next fly-by chance of KBO belt.  Acknowledgement: This work is supported by CE3 lunar lander mission, by the national key basic research and development plan (Grant No. 2015CB857101), by the NSFC No. 41590851, and by the State Key Laboratory of Astronautic Dynamics.  References: [1] http://pluto.jhuapl.edu/. [2] Christopher C. D., et al., ( 2004) IEEE Aerospace Conference Proc., vol. 3, 1463–1476; [3] Ping J. S. et al, (2016) LPS XXXXVII, Abstract #1339. [4]ftp://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/pub/eph/planets/ascii/de430.    1346.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
