 SHOCK-DARKENING IN ORDINARY CHONDRITES: PRESSURE-TEMPERATURE p-T CONDITIONS STUDY BY IMPACT MODELLING.  J. Moreau1, T. Kohout¹,² and K. Wünnemann3, 1Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Finland (julien.moreau@helsinki.fi),  2Institute of Geology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic, ³Museum für Naturkunde, Berlin, Leibniz Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity Science, Berlin, Germany. Introduction:  Shock-darkening in ordinary chondrites is the partial melting of metals and iron sulphide in a network of melt into veins and the silicate cracks, remaining solid themselves. With the recent fall of the Chelyabinsk  LL5  meteorite,  such  features  has  been studied in [1] and can be seen in Fig. 1. It is a cause for the changes in the reflectance spectra  of these meteorites,  making their  classification more difficult  ([2], [3]). In such cases, S-type asteroids (chondritic silicate composition) spectra look like C-type asteroids (associated with carbonaceous chondrites). Methods:  To study  the  pressure and temperatures p-T conditions  at  which this  process  occurs,  we use the shock  physics code iSALE [4]. In the parameters we include materials  typical  of ordinary  chondrites:  olivine (Fa25 or Fa10) at ~96%  iron grains and or/troilite (approximated in the models with a pyrrhotite material) Olivine has a porosity of 6%. These settings are consistent with an LL5 ordinary chondrite with a composition dominated by olivine Fa27, iron metal and troilite. Equations of state (EOS). An equation of state describes a material behavior under shock-pressure. It can be compared to shock experiment Hugoniots data. We used either a Tillotson EOS [5] or an analytical EOS (ANEOS). Both EOS require a number of material-specific input parameters such as:  the density  the bulk modulus  the internal energy  the compression In Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, the  Hugoniots  data from  the  Tillotson EOS,  ANEOS  and literature  for  different  material  including  olivine  Fa25 [adapted from 6] and Fa10 (ANEOS)  can be seen. One issue is the  limitation  of  the Tillotson  EOS  not accounting for phase changes  in  olivine. Low  pressures phases  are  well fitted  in  the  first graphic  (Fig. 2) but is an issue in the  second  (Fig. 3, important  for the  post-shock temperatures  calculation).  In  Fig. 4  a  good  fit  for the Tillotson EOS of  Troilite    to pyrrhotite  iron sulphide  can  be seen. Porosity and strength. In iSALE, porosity is considered in two ways: finely dispersed in the material (as a material parameter, distension α = 1 / (1-Φ) where Φ is the porosity fraction [4])  or in resolved individual pores. In the models we use the distension α. Concerning the strength model, the material is defined either as hydrodynamic or perfect plastic (Von Mies model, using the yield strength as the only parameter). Fig 1. Chelyabinsk meteorite samples and their electron microscope  snapshots. Fig  4.  Hugoniots  data  for  pyrrhotite  to which a Tillotson EOS for troilite is fit to be used in the modelling. The bulk modulus  was one  of  the  only parameters  that needed to be changed  from the  Tillotson EOS parameters to fit the data points. Fig 3. Hugoniots data for the olivine solid-solution  (from  Tillotson  EOS, ANEOS and literature)  given for particle and shock-wave velocities. Fig 2. Hugoniots data for the olivine solidsolution (from Tillotson EOS, ANEOS and literature) given for density and pressure.   Post-shock temperatures (PST's).  To study  the  melt fraction, we defined  the  postshock  temperatures relative to the  peak-shock pressures.  After the shock-wave, pressures  drop to  0,  residual energy is  translated to post-shock temperatures (Fig.  5).  We used a linear relationship existing in the Hugoniots data (see Fig 3 and Fig. 4) giving U = C + S.up, with up - particle velocity and U - shock-wave velocity. [7,8,9] Results: Using  tracers,  we  can  study  the  peakshock pressures  in  a  material  to  compute the PST's. The melt fraction  of  the material  is then  assessed. In  Fig.  6  can be seen a theoretical example  of  postshock  results using   a mesoscale model  with  a 50  cells  thick flyer  plate (over  the  0 mm  mark  in the first panel) hitting  a  450 cells  thick sample  plate made  of  nonporous  and hydrodynamic olivine  Fa10 (ANEOS) and sub-mm iron grains (ANEOS). Conclusion: The key result of our study is the behaviour of the material under shock pressures (EOS'). Using PST's and material melting temperatures, we obtained  a  good  approximate  for  which material  melts first. Furthermore, troilite seems to be the best candidate for a complete melt with an unmolten or partially molten silicate phase.  We also noticed the strong dependence of the material and the associated EOS' and Hugoniots data. A propagating shock-wave will cause reflections on  the iron  grain  boundaries  with olivine where the peak-shock pressures attained will depend on the material and how well it reflects the shock-wave. Such shock-wave reflection will heat the surrounding material  (olivine)  due  to  higher reflected  peak-shock pressures. Future  Work: From  constraining  the  material EOS, the strength model and porosity, the next step is to implement a mesoscale model [10] with olivine, iron and  troilite  grains  included  (separately  or  together). Completing this study will help us to get the best p-T conditions at which shock-darkening  occurs and therefore leading to experiments with real samples. Acknowledgments: Our thanks go to the team of the Museum für  Naturkunde in Berlin,  Germany, for sharing their knowledge and ideas with us. This work is also supported by the Academy of Finland. References: [1]  Kohout  T.  et  al.  (2014)  Icarus, 228, 78-85. [2] DeMeo F. E. et al. (2009) Icarus, 202, 160-180.  [3] DeMeo F. E. and Carry R. P. (2014) Nature,  505,  629-634.  [4]  Wünnemann K. et  al.  (2006) Icarus, 180, 514-527. [5] Tillotson J. H. (1962)  Gen. Atom. Div. Of Gen.  Dyn.  [6]  Marinova M. M. et  al. (2011)  Icarus,  211,  960-985.  [7]  Artemieva  N.  and Ivanov B. (2004) Icarus, 171, 84-101. [8] Fritz J. et al. (2005) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 40, 9/10, 1393-1411. [9] Watters W. A. et al. (2009) JGR, 114, E02001 [10] Bland P. A. et al. (2014). Nature. Comm., 5:5451. Fig  6  Theoretical  results  on  a  50x500  cells model with a flyer plate hitting at 5 km/s a 450 cells thick sample made of olivine Fa10 where sub-mm iron grains are randomly resolved. The iron  behaviour  made  it  reflecting  the  shockwave back to the forsterite, heating it. The iron is  also subject  to  higher  peak-shock  pressures (as  seen  in  the  red  circled  zone  of  the  first panel).  Post-shock  temperatures  in  the  second panel allow us to compute the melt fraction in the  third  panel  where  the  material  is  distinguished. Fig  5.  Graphic  evolution  of  the  post-shock temperatures  at  different  peak-shock  pressures. Note: peak-shock pressures reached by the materials depend on their Hugoniots data. 