1367.PDF
UNIQUE ASPECTS OF THE NASA PACIFIC REGIONAL PLANETARY DATA CENTER.   Peter Mouginis-Mark1, Chris Peterson1, Polly Nakamura1 and Ethan Kastner1, 1Hawaii Institute Geophysics and Planetology, University Hawaii, Honolulu, HI  96822 (pmm@higp.hawaii.edu).  Introduction:  Hagerty et al. [1] describe the general goals and capabilities of the NASA Regional Planetary Image Facilities (RPIFs), a network of nine facilities in the U.S., as well as seven facilities around the world.  One member of this network is the Pacific Regional Planetary Data Center (PRPDC), hosted by the University of Hawaii at Manoa.  In addition to striving to provide capabilities equivalent to the rest of the RPIF Network [1], the PRPDC faces not only logistic challenges but also research opportunities that other RPIFs lack.  First, as the only RPIF within a radius of ~3,000 km, the PRPDC needs to reach users from (potentially) a much greater geographic area than other members of the RPIF Network.  Even within our own state, users live on several different islands so that travel to the PRPDC, or public outreach to these other islands, requires different approaches to mainland RPIFs.  Secondly, Hawaii is known worldwide for its active volcanoes, and many fine planetary analogs can be found on both the Hawaii Island and Oahu [2 -5].  Exploiting the opportunity to place past, present and future NASA planetary missions in the context of volcanism in Hawaii therefore provides a powerful way to engage our community and exploit current news items.  Here we describe both the current PRPDC activities and our plans by which we can further meet the RPIF Network’s mission and serve our local community.   Fig. 1: PRPDC participates in a biennial Open House.  Holdings and Activities: The PRPDC’s collection includes ~18,000 Apollo Metric and Hasselblad prints, ~2,000 Lunar Orbiter prints, ~1,500 Viking and Magellan photomosaics, ~7,100 planetary maps, ~1,600 books, numerous planetary globes, an extensive collection of NASA CDs (e.g., Viking, Voyager, Magellan, Galileo, and Clementine) and a “Magic Planet” [1].  Using these resources, the PRPDC engages in a variety of efforts to educate the public about planetary science.  The biennial SOEST Open House (Fig. 1) brings ~6,000 people to our school, many of whom view PRPDC exhibits.  We also provide telescopic views of the Moon and planets and discuss planetary science at numerous “star parties” each year in cooperation with the Hawaiian Astronomical Society.  PRPDC staff also judge the annual state Science Fair and participate in many annual or special events such as Lacy Veach Day at Punahou School and the UH Institute for Astronomy Open House.  Visits are made to schools, societies (e.g., the Rotary Club) and museums, and school classes visit the PRPDC.  Data Access and Visualization:  One of our new initiatives is to leverage the UH Laboratory for Advanced Visualization and Applications (LAVA) [6].  LAVA will introduce and implement next generation visualization techniques to help facilitate both research and education efforts.  Special software has been developed under LAVA to enable multiple, large (73” x 41”, or 84” diagonally; 3840 x 2160 pixels), 3-D capable, computer monitors to both display large image data (e.g., LROC or HiRISE images, and 3-D images) and videos, as well as multiple computer desktops.  The software and monitors also provide a video-conferencing capability wherein every participant has the same access to the display screens for web-based collaboration.  Such collaboration might include simply accessing planetary data on the Internet, or working with full-resolution planetary images with software such as ENVI, ArcInfo, JMARS or ISIS.  This LAVA capability is under development at the PRPDC, with two monitors already in place (Fig. 2).  Our plan for 2016 includes adding a third similar monitor to this capability.   Fig. 2:  The first phase of the PRPDC’s data visualization capability is already in place to aid the analysis of large planetary data sets, as well as facilitate video-conferencing between the numerous campuses within the UH System.   1367.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Planetary Analogs:  Landforms in Hawaii have long been used as analogs to aid the interpretation of planetary volcanism [2 – 4].  The combination of the easy access to young basaltic volcanic features, and the abundant remote sensing data that mimic measurements made by instruments on planetary spacecraft, make the comparison between Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes particularly useful for understanding volcanism on the planets [5].  With the spectacular new data sets being collected for the Moon, Mars and the Outer Solar System, the PRPDC has a new initiative to make these materials available on line through a Planetary Volcanism Analog (PVA) web site [7].   The current content of the PVA site includes the following components:  (1) A picture gallery of planetary volcanism images.  There are some classic images of volcanic features on the planets that have stimulated discussions of volcanic processes operating under different surface gravities, atmospheric pressures, and (potentially) different magma compositions [8 - 10];   (2) A catalog of field photographs taken by investigators at the University of Hawaii by different themes; e.g., lava shields, active flows, cinder cones, pit craters and ash deposits.  This catalog represents one of the unique data holdings for the PRPDC and has been collected over >30 years of field work conducted on Kilauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes.  Currently we are in the process of digitizing a large collection of 35-mm slides to add to this web site;   (3) A series of high-resolution digital posters that are available for download on the PRPDC’s PVA site.  At the present time, we have two different posters which focus on (1) an overview of Hawaii as a planetary analog, and (2) the geology of the Hawaiian Islands, together with field photographs to illustrate some of the most volcanic sites.  These two posters are free to download and are available at [11]; (4) A series of short (4 - 5 pages) Planetary Analog Briefs on individual volcanology topics, in format similar to that used for the highly successful Planetary Science Research Discoveries (PSRD) web site [12].  These briefs illustrate how volcanic features in Hawaii have been imaged by different sensors, such as lidars, imaging radars, and hyperspectral thermal cameras.     Outreach to the Community:  Since the RPIF Network was initiated in the 1970s [1], an explosion has taken place in ways to provide the community with information on current planetary missions.  The PRPDC needs to keep pace with this trend, and has therefore increased its efforts to work with the local media to summarize the latest planetary mission results as well as show the PRPDC’s special efforts todrawn the connection between volcanism in Hawaii and the planets.  Two recent efforts have been to work with local community TV [13] and Hawaii Public Radio [14].  These organizations place their programs on the Internet so that the PRPDC can benefit from being part of their publicity and archive.    Future Plans:  Striving to take advantage of new digital technologies, the PRPDC is considering other ways to bring the excitement of planetary geology to the classroom and our public outreach efforts.  As we look towards our next five-year plan, we are considering adding 3-D printers to our capabilities in order to fabricate a series of models that show examples of impact craters, planetary volcanoes, and other landforms.  The rapid increase in the number of digital elevations models from sensors such as HiRISE and LROC will make this effort much easier to develop. A new initiative to reach the general public in Hawaii is also in the planning stagesand hopefully will include the production of a popular science book to be published by the University of Hawaii Press.  With >8M tourists visiting Hawaii each year, many of whom like to obtain souvenirs that are colorful and unique to the Islands, this type of publication could well be an exciting new way for PRPDC to inform many tourists from around the world about the unique connection between Hawaii’s geology and phenomena such as volcanic eruptions on the Moon, Mars, Venus and the outer planet satellites.  References: [1] Hagerty et al., this abstract vol.  [2] Greeley, R. (1974). Hawaiian Planetology Conference, NASA TMX 62362, 257 pp. [3] Carr M. H. and R. Greeley (1980). Volcanic Features of Hawaii.  NASA SP403, 211 pp.  [4] Rowland, S. K. et al. (2011).  GSA SP. 483, 401 – 434.  [5] Mouginis-Mark, P. J. et al. (2011). GSA SP. 483, 435 – 448.  [6] Univ. Hawaii at Manoa (2015).  http://lava.hawaii.edu.   [7] http://www.higp.hawaii.edu/prpdc/pva/index.html.  [8] Wilson, L. and J. W. Head (1981).  JGR 86: 2971 – 3001.   [9]  Head, J. W. and L. Wilson (1986).  JGR 91: 9407 – 9446.  [10] Wilson, L. and J. W. Head (1996).  Revs. Geophys. 32: 221 – 263.  [11] http://www.higp.hawaii.edu/prpdc/pva/terravolc.html  [12] http://www.psrd.hawaii.edu/ [13] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skkAfSaKcyM. [14] http://www.bytemarkscafe.org/2015/12/02/episode379-planetary-update-dec-2-2015/    1367.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
