1428.PDF
FOSSIL IDENTIFICATION AT MARS ANALOGUE DRILLS - EVALUATION OF ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.  B.Polonkai1 (H 1117, Budapest, Pázmány Péter sétány 1/C, Hungary.) A. Kereszturi 2MTA CSFK (H 9400 Sopron, Csatkai u. 6-8, Hungary.) (E-mail: polonkaib@caesar.elte.hu)    Introduction:  There are two resons for fossil hunting on Mars are life might emerge there, and the we could improve our knowledge on to separate very old abiogen and biogen features as Mars any sedimentary features is expected to be preserved better than on Earth. Opposite to Earth because of weak weathering and lack of global plate recycling, very old sediments (>3.5 Ga) are well preserved. Our knowledge and experience in the identification of oldest fossils on Mars could improve much with analyzing the oldest rocks on the Earth. The aim of this work is to establish some framework for the approach, how certain fossils on the Earth could be used to better understand the expectations for morphological fossil identification on Mars.  Methods: During the work we used optical microscopy, morphometry and samples from Hungary [1,2]. Most of these biological investigations were carried out during the PHD study of the first author at the ELTE university. Here astrobiology relevant aspects are indicated with specific emphasis on the ExoMars rover (EXM) analyzing capability of the drilled material [3,4]. Although the activity of the crushing station might destroy several type of possible fossils, as primitive organisms are expected to leave behind small scale features, there are some possiblites for successful observations. In this work we outline some theoretical background for such approach. Results: Searching for possible fossils on Mars, the criteria system applied in such work should be modified to better fit to the expected Martian conditions. In Table 1. several of such parameters can be read, and it also shows that substantial improvement is still necessary to estimate what kind of differences are expected comparing fossile identification on Earth and Mars.  Analyzing specific examples, several such features can be seen in the insets of Figure 1. Using Earth based knowledge, a potential classivfication of mmmicrometer scale fissiles can be read in the Table 2. focusing on the spatial scale that might be used by ExoMars rover's instruments. The main facilities for such activity are CLUPI and MicrOmega detectors. Details of the indicated image insets are: a) Zeolites on basalt,  b) Chalcedony and zeolite in andesite, c) Possible Hungarian outcrop contains goethit (Buda Hills, Hungary), d) Twisted threads of goethite (Breiðdalur, Iceland, [5]), e) BIF, red: FeOH minerals, grey: quartz and silicates (Encyclopedia of Science), f) Macrobiological generated trace fossil in Lapis Limestone (Pécs, Hungary), g) Stromatolite [6], h) Stromatolite at Polgárdi Limestone Formation (Polgárdi, Hungary), i) Calcareous algae containing thin section (Dinnyés Dolomite Fm, Gárdony, Hungary), j) Microfossil containing rock (Mályinka Limestone Fm, Berenás, Hungary), k) Green algae containig rock (Büdaörs Dolomite Fm, Nagykovácsi, Hungary), l) Green algae containig rock (Büdaörs Dolomite Fm, Nagykovácsi, Hungary), m) Gipsum-anhydrite rock from (Perkupa Evaporite Fm, Perkupa, Hungary),  n) Microbiofilm of carbonaceous matter in transmitted light [7], o) Cryptobioitc crust (Kitty's Gap Chert Fm, Pilbara, Australia, AdventureBuddies Blog), p) hypolit colonization of qartz pavement (Tibetan Plateau, [8]) Table 1. Criteria for retention and analysis of fossils Factor Features on Earth Features on Mars localization general geological mapping methods similar to Earth, by spacecrafts and surface missions stratigraphical correlation regional geological  settings (stratigraphy) difficult for Martian meteorites, estimated for Mars surface geological dating geochronology mainly from stratigraphy and craterin ages syngenetic with host rock difficulty: after sedimentation it can be redeposited or / and permeated by fluids weakly modified after sediment formation, expect surface oxidation and irradiation metamorphic grade The higher the metamorphic grade, the more the fine structure overwritten expected to be low because the lack of global plate tectonism show features of biological origin preserved cell structure, trace fossil (element association in the strata by life activities), fenestral pores, organic material if conditions at the possible origin of life on Mars were similar to Earth, similar expactations are for microfossile structures (no better approach) comparison to current microorganism biological origin element differentiation in the sediments can be examined invers comparison: to compare abiogen and biogen origin especially for minerals in Martian simulation chambers Mars relevant expectations: Based on the listed potential analogue sites (Table 2., fourth column) Hungarian locations could also improve the fossile identification methods, and at least provide background information on various abiogen features and possible pseudo-fossils in the analyzed spatial scale.  References: [1] Polonkai B. et al. (2015) Hantkeniana 10, 135-142. [2] Polonkai B. et al. (2015) A Magyar Földtani és Geofizikai Intézet évi jelentése a 2015. évről. MFGI, in prep. [3] Westall F et al. (2015) Astrobiology 15:998-1029. [4] Foucher et al. (2014) EPSC, 2014-472-1. [5] Hoffman F. (2000) PSS 48:1077-1086. [6] New York St. Dep. of Environmental Conversation. [7] Westall F. et al. (2010) PSSe (2010) 59:1093-1106. [8] Fiona K. Y. Wong et al. Microb Ecol (2010) 60:730-739. 1428.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
.Table 2. Main fossile types as examples (1,2,3 columns), identification method (4. col.), EXM relevant possibilities (5. col.) Fossil "type" size range Earth example occurrence Earth example in Hungary method of  identification identification possibilities for ExoMars rover SFF 1-3 mmm Kozakov (CZE), Germany, Iceland, Fundy-bay (CND) calcedons in volcanic rocks (Gyöngyössolymos, Erdőbénye), zeolite, quartz in neogéne volcanites, goethit (Buda Hills) optical  micriscopy possibly observable by MicrOmega above 50100 m diameter Trace fossils: BIF, stromatolite stromatolite mm-cm SW Australia, NShark Bay (recent), Bahama-islands. Polgárdi Limestone Formation,  Villány Formation,  (Villány Templom Hill) optical macroscopic obs.  (morphology) in ideal case MaMISS could identify by scanning method, but this has not been tested.   CLUPI could have been able to observe, but it would be quite difficult to identify in the fine comes out of the drilled hole BIF cm Brazil, Australia, USA - morpology,  isotopic microfossiles mm-cm Isua, Greenland,  Pilbara (AUS) calcareous algae: Dinnyés Fm, phylloid algae: Mályinka Fm, green algae: Nagyvisnyó Fm, Diplopora: Budaörs Fm, diatomite: Szurdokpüspöki Fm,  alginite: Pula Fm. in situ, optical microscopy halophils mm Bad Ischl (AUT), Chott el Jerid (TUN) evaporitic formations  (Perkupa Fm., Tabajd Fm.) optical, SEM, EDS, X-ray microbiofilm m Pilbara, Australia unknown SEM, EDS cryptobiotic crust m-mm Pilbara (AUS) 2,5 Ga, Devon-isl. recent Szabadbattyán (cianobacteria) optical microscopy by MicrOmega above 50-100 m diameter if larger than a kb. 50-100 m hypolithic colonies mm-cm Atacama desert (CHI) recent possible in Pleistocene rocks optical microscopy SEM, EDS    Figure 1. Images of various fossils (see the text for details)  Acknowledgment: This work was supported by the COOP-NN-116972 project, and the NKFIH, Hantken Foundation and the EMET: Nemzeti Tehetség Program. 1428.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
