1441.PDF
EMPLACEMENT HISTORY OF SELF-SECONDARIES. Zhiyong Xiao1,2,3, Nils C. Prieur2, Stephanie C. Werner2. 1Planetary Science Institute, China University of Geosciences (Wuhan);2 Centre for Earth Evolution and Dynamics, University of Oslo; 3Space Science Institute, Macau University of Science and Technology (zyxiao@cug.edu.cn). Introduction: Self-secondaries are secondary craters formed by ejecta that have both large launch angles regarding to the target plane (i.e., close to vertical) and high ejection velocity so that their emplacement postdate that of continuous ejecta deposits. Such secondaries are located on top of ballistic ejecta deposits adjacent to the rim of the parent crater, and/or within the rim of the parent crater. Compared with normal secondaries on Moon which usually occur in chains and clusters, self-secondaries are spatially more scattered and they exhibit more circular morphology. The possible existence of self-secondaries was firstly raised in 1969 [1], but debate exists about whether or not selfsecondaries affect crater populations in a statistical sense [e.g., 2, 3]. A major controversy in the debate was whether self-secondaries [2] or target properties [3] were the main cause for crater density variations observed on different parts of ejecta deposits around a given crater [e.g., 4]. Recent numerical modelling [e.g., 5], highresolution crater statistics [e.g., 4, 6], regional context analyses [7], and morphological studies [8] all suggest that self-secondaries could be numerously formed during impact cratering, and their non-uniform distribution and special trajectory compared with normal impact ejecta could be attributed to the above observations. Therefore, crater frequencies measured on the continuous ejecta deposits of a crater do not necessarily represent its formation age, and challenge  the prevalent age determination methods and production functions descriptions [8]. On the other hand, presently known impact cratering mechanics does not predict high (e.g., >80° from the target plane) launch angle ejecta. Understanding the launch mechanism for ejecta that form self-secondaries will promote our understanding about impact cratering processes. A missing bridge between present observations about self-secondaries and their origin is the time sequence of their emplacement in the frame of impact cratering in general. Emplacement sequence between self-secondaries and ‘normal’ ballistic ejecta. Ejecta forming selfsecondaries also follow ballistic trajectories. Here ‘normal’ ballistic ejecta refer to ejecta deposits that form more distant secondaries and continuous ejecta deposits. Many recent crater counts have demonstrated that observable self-secondaries postdate the emplacement of continuous ejecta deposits [e.g., 2, 4, 6, 7]. Soon (i.e., on the order of ages comparable with those of Giordano Bruno and Tycho craters on the Moon) after the formation of a crater, self-secondaries dominate the small crater population accumulated on top of the continuous ejecta [e.g., 4, 7]. Emplacement sequence between self-secondaries and impact melt flows on top of ‘normal’ ejecta. A layer of melt deposits are frequently observed on the top of continuous ejecta deposits on various planetary bodies [e.g., 9]. The flow paths of such melt deposits are clear around fresh impact craters, and some embayment relationships between the melt flows/deposits and self-secondaries suggests that many selfsecondaries have been accumulated on the ‘normal’ ejecta while the melt was still flowing [e.g., 4, 5]. Besides the embayment relationship, the crater densities on the ‘normal’ ejecta, melt veneers over restricted areas of normal ejecta, and small melt pools at local topographic lows also support this emplacement sequence (Fig. 1) [7].  Fig. 1. Tycho crater on the Moon and the emplacement history of continous ballistic ejecta deposits, impact melt, and self-secondaries [7]. Did self-secondaries still being deposited when or after the melt deposits were emplaced? Recent observation [8] find that around very young parent craters, self-secondaries on ‘normal ballistic ejecta deposits’ have circular shapes, but craters on both the melt veneer and melt pools exhibit irregular shapes with large spalled boulders around the crater rims, hinting that the craters on the melt deposits are also self-secondaries, and their irregular morphology was caused by the combined effect of low re-impact velocity and half-molten melt deposits. However, the effect of target property and impact velocity on crater morphology is not well understood. Hokusai is the youngest complex crater on the northern middle–high latitudes of Mercury [10]. Impact melt deposits are more abundant both within and around Hokusai compared with similar-sized Mercuri1441.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
an craters, covering many secondaries (Fig. 2). The highly-elliptical orbit of the MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging (MESSENGER) spacecraft about Mercury has captured unprecedented high resolution images for the northern hemisphere, permitting us to study the detailed distribution of secondaries around Hokusai [10]. The ‘normal’ ejecta of Hokusai have been all/mostly covered by subsequent outward melt flows, if selfsecondaries have once accumulated on the buried ‘normal’ ejecta, they are not clearly visible on the surface.  Fig. 2. Hokusai crater on Mercury and the emplacement sequence of self-secondaries, ‘normal’ ballistic ejecta, and melt flows close to the crater rim [10]. Small craters clearly postdating the melt flows are visible. The crater density (N(D>=100 m)/106 km2) on top of the melt flows shows variations at different azimuths regarding to the impact direction, and the density is substantially higher at the uprange (Fig. 3). Only few complex craters at the northern hemisphere of Mercury are younger than Hokusai, suggesting that the small crater population on the melt flows may be dominated by the self-secondaries of Hokusai instead of being distant secondaries from other craters.  Fig. 3. The small crater population on top of the melt flows around Hokusai has larger density at the uprange [10]. Emplacement sequence between self-secondaries and melt ponds: Few small craters are visible on the floor of Hokusai, suggesting either that most selfsecondaries have been formed when the impact melt within the crater floor was settled, or that selfsecondaries have also accumulated on the melt pools on the crater floor, but the hot melt could not support the topography of the self-secondaries. Numerous melt pools are also deposited on the crater rim of Tycho. Crater densities on 6 different melt pools do not show variations [6], although the morphology of these craters is dramatically different from that of self-secondaries on normal ejecta [8], suggesting that self-secondaries might have ceased forming when the melt pools were emplaced. However, this preliminary comparison should be extended to more cases. Emplacement history and possible formation mechanism for self-secondaries. Ejecta that formed elf-secondaries should have both large ejection angles and velocities so that they land after the ‘normal’ continuous ejecta deposits were emplaced, and they are still dropping when the impact melt was flowing over the normal ejecta. The flight time depends on the launch velocity and angle, but it must be at least on the order of minutes. Possible reasons causing such highangle ejecta include: (1) spalled fragments at the rear of the projectile; (2) chaotic interaction of shock wave and heterogeneities in the target. References: [1] Shoemaker E. M. et al. (1969) JGR, 74(25), 6081–6119. [2] Plescia J. B. et al. (2010) LPS XXXXI, 2038. [3] van der Bogert C. H. (2010) LPS XXXXI, 2165. [4] Zanetti M. et al. (2015), Workshop on Issues in Crater Studies and the Dating of Planetary Surfaces, #9041. [5] Prieur N. C. et al. (2015), Bridging the Gap III: Impact cratering in nature, experiment, and modeling, #1096. [6] Xiao Z. and Strom R. G. (2012) Icarus, 220, 254–267. [7] Xiao Z. and Werner S. C. (2015); JGR, 120, doi:10.1002/2015JE004860. [8] Plescia J. B. and Robinson M. S. (2015), 46th LPSC, # 2535. [9] Osinski G. R. et al. (2011), EPSL, 310(3), 167–181. [10] Xiao Z. and Werner S. C. (2015), Bridging the Gap III: Impact cratering in nature, experiment, and modeling, #1064. Acknowledgement: This work was initiated by the support of the Research Council of Norway (235058/F20 CRATER CLOCK).), and through the Centres of Excellence funding scheme, project number 223272 (CEED). It is currently supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 41403053) and fund CUG130106 of China University of Geosciences (Wuhan). 1441.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
