 MODIFYING MARTIAN SURFACE CHEMISTRY: CHLORIDES AS SUBLIMATES FROM VOLCANIC DEGASSING ON MARS.  N.J. DiFrancesco 1, H. Nekvasil 1, D.H. Lindsley 1, and A.D. Rogers 1  1 Stony Brook University Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100. Nicholas.Difrancesco@stonybrook.edu  Introduction:  It has been well recognized that the Martian surface has been shaped through time by sedimentary and impact processes that have modified the original igneous crust [1].  The addition of sublimates from volcanic gases as a mechanism of compositional modification of the crust is far less well understood. Analysis of the rock and regolith on the Martian surface has revealed large quantities of Cl [2].  Orbital observations of surface chlorine indicate that it is not homogenously distributed, it is in fact concentrated near volcanic complexes such as Tharsis [3]. This suggests that the source of at least these local concentrations of surface Cl is from volcanic vents, fumaroles or other igneous sources.  How much have sublimates from volcanic degassing contributed to the heterogeneous concentration of these in Martian soils? In order to assess this we need a better understanding of the nature of volcanic sublimates and to discover a means for identifying them.  Studies have demonstrated that Cl is released in large quantities from a depressurizing magma [4,5].  Cl can be contained in a magma under pressure; however as a magma rises towards the surface, confining pressure is reduced, and Cl is able to leave the melt as part of a vapor phase.  When this occurs, the Cl does not boil off alone, rather as Cl-bearing species formed with cations scavenged from the melt. These species cause changes in the bulk chemistry of the magma. and will also determine minerals ultimately deposited at the surface, perhaps yielding a unique fingerprint of chlorides concentrated directly through volcanic processes. It is the purpose of this study to assess the nature of chlorides derived directly from sublimation of volcanic gases by experimentally simulating a hypothetical Martian magmatic system. Analysis of the degassing products will provide information on possible effects of Cl loss on the crystallization history of Cl-bearing Martian magmas. Methods:  Experiments for this study were designed to simulate a Cl-rich Martian magma degassing at low pressure and high temperature.  A ~25 cm long silica glass tube was sealed and evacuated, and used as a nominally closed system that spanned a range of temperatures from above the liquidus of the basalt at 1150°C to below 400°C.  As shown in Figure 1, a source magma was allowed to degas into the column;  the sublimates formed along the inner walls of the tube at lower temperature were analyzed.  Source magma.  A starting material having the composition of a known Martian basalt, the MERanalyzed rock "Irvine" [6], was synthesized from powdered metals, oxides, and silicates.  An additional 2.5 wt.% of Cl was added in the form of MgCl2.  This rock composition was selected because it is a good example of an analyzed extrusive igneous rock that is sufficiently fine-grained to have likely been liquid when extruded onto the Martian surface.  The ferrous/ferric ratio used was chosen to yield an fO2 of approximately one half log unit above FMQ [7].  This was independently verified in some experiments by using a two-oxide monitor consisting of Fe-Ti spinel and ilmenite, which change composition in response to subtle changes in fO2 [8].   These powders were separately homogenized, then loaded into cleaned, 2cm Au80Pd20 capsules.  Each capsule was lightly crimped closed allowing space for vapors to leave the melt.  Capsule(s) are then placed at the bottom of a silica glass tube, approximately 25 cm long.  Conditions. The entire tube was evacuated, and sealed (Fig. 1).  This was then placed inside a vertically-oriented furnace, with the bottom end containing the capsule situated at the hotspot.  Temperature was regulated by an automatic controller, and was set to 1150°C at the hot spot.   Figure 1: Diagram of silica glass tube hung inside of a vertically-oriented furnace.  Tube is approximately 25cm long by 1 cm in diameter.  Temperature in the furnace ranges from 1150°C at the bottom near the capsule to <400°C at the top.     Analysis. The setup was held at temperature for 12 to 72 hours, then removed and allowed to cool. Upon cooling, tubes were inspected to verify they maintained integrity, and the there were no visible cracks or breaks in the glass.  The interior of the upper portion of the silica glass was coated by sublimated material deposited during the heating process.  The silica tube was first split open longitudinally and dried, then the products were analyzed by SEM/EDAX.  Sublimates were analyzed by Raman and XRD.  Bulk analysis of sublimated materials was collected by solution ICP-OES.  The remaining degassed product was also recovered, now mainly glass, and was analyzed by electron microprobe. Results: Coatings of sublimates on the inside of the tube formed across a range of temperatures from 200800°C.  These sublimates seemed to be dominated by chlorides; visually, these coatings were yellow- orange, and with time, darkened to red-brown, presumably as they deliquesced and/or oxidized once exposed to air.  Small crystallites soon deliquesced into a pool of liquid when exposed to the atmosphere.  This behavior is similar to that of ferric chloride.  EDAX analysis of the material confirmed the existence of crystals of iron chlorides, as well as NaCl, and KCl (Fig. 2, 3).  These crystals ranged in size from approximately 20-500 microns, with some larger crystals over 1mm.     Figure 2: Electron photomicrograph showing sublimated crystals of chlorides that were produced by magmatic degassing.    Implications: The ability to directly precipitate chloride salts from the vapor phase of a Martian magma allows for an alternative mechanism for locally enriching the surface in Cl, without needing to invoke large scale precipitation and weathering of rock.  On a larger scale, perhaps volcanic outgassing released Fe, Na and K-chlorides into the atmosphere, which were then disseminated widely.    Figure 3: Photograph of iron chloride crystals adhered to the inside of the silica glass tube.  Field of view of the image is approximately 1.5mm.    Figure 4: Ratio diagram comparing the starting magma composition with the that of the degassed material.  Oxides with ratios below 1 have been depleted during the degassing process.  This includes FeO, Na2O, and K2O as well as P2O5 and SO2.  These salts would have collected in the soil, ice, or perhaps could even be associated with the global dust.  If these chlorides were oxidized after irradiation by ultraviolet rays from sunlight, they could have been converted to perchlorates [9] at the Martian surface and contributed to the perchlorates in the Martian fines[10].    References: [1] Planetary crusts: their composition, origin and evolution. Vol. 10. Cambridge University Press, 2009.[2] Clark and Baird JGR:SE 6, 10. 1979. [3] Keller et al. JGR:Plnts 111, E3. 2006. [4] Settle JGR:SE 84, B14. 1979. [5] Ustunisik et al. Am. Min. 96, 10.  2011. [6] McSween et al. JGR:Plnts. 111, E9. 2006. [7] Kress and Carmichael Cont. to Min. and Pet. 108(1-2). 1991. [8]Anderson et al. Comps. & Geosci. 19.9 1993. [9] Carrier and Kounaves GRL 42, 10.  2015 [10] Hecht et al. Science 325. 2009.  