1528.PDF
Olivine-rich basalt outcrops in the subsurface of western Noachis Terra, Mars and geological implications.   Cong Pan and A. Deanne. Rogers, Stony Brook University, Department of Geosciences, 255 Earth and Space Science Building, Stony Brook, New York, 11794-2100, Cong.Pan@stonybrook.edu  Introduction: A global study of central uplifts of impact craters showed that multiple near and thermal infrared spectral units are present in individual central uplifts in the western Noachis Terra area (Figure 1) [1-2]. Five of the seven craters exhibit olivine basaltic and/or olivine + pyroxene basaltic lithologies associated with central uplifts with diameters from 20km to 90km; multiple lithologies are exposed in some craters [2]. It is not clear whether these exposures sample a continuous subsurface olivine-bearing bedrock unit, or if these are isolated subsurface units. Here we investigate the mafic compositions exposed in deep channels and ejecta of large impact craters in this region to try to assess whether a continuous unit could be present.    Geologic setting: There are several valley networks and outflow channels that cut through western Noachis Terra, including Ladon Valles and Uzboi Vallis [4]. Strong olivine signatures have been reported in Ladon Valles with thermal infrared observations [3]. And in Ares Valles, located north of Margartifer Basin [4] multiple olivine-bearing units separated by olivine-poor units are present [5-6], which may be analogous to the multiple units exposed by impact craters or outflow channels in western Noachis Terra. Here, we investigate the occurrence and distribution of olivine-rich outcrops exposed by impact craters and deep outflow channels in western Noachis Terra through near and thermal infrared spectroscopy, to understand their relationship to the multiple units exposed in central uplifts, and the implications for the geologic history of the region.   Data and Methods:  We have used Thermal Emission Spectrometer (TES), Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) and Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) images to examine mineral compositions.  Decorrelation stretch (DCS) images of THEMIS and mafic mineral indices of CRISM were first used to identify the olivine-rich outcrops within the valley networks and out flow channels. Next, THEMIS, TES and CRISM spectral averages were extracted from the olivine-rich outcrops if qualified data is available. Then, cubic polynomial fit is used to determine the emissivity minimum of THEMIS-derived spectra. The minimum position is an indicator for compositional differences between surfaces that shifts to longer wavelengths as silica content decreases [2]. For example, the positions of cubic fit minima for dunite and olivine basalt are 10.92 and 10.82 respectively, while for anorthosite is 9.98.  Results:  The study area is in western Noachis Terra where four impact craters exposed multiple spectral distinct units in their central uplifts (Figure 1) [2]. All the valley networks and outflow channels have been investigated with near and thermal infrared data and olivine-rich outcrops have been identified in Ladon Valles and Uzboi Vallis with minimum position of cubic fit for THEMIS data (Figure 2). Ladon Valles is about 30-60 km wide, 1-2 km deep. There are two mafic units found in Ladon Vallis with the red and yellow colors (Figure 2). The two units are associated with bedrocks with higher tempertures in THEMIS nighttime images. The ~11 µm absorption feature of red color unit (unit1) concentrated in the foor of the channel to the southwest is consistent with olivine rich materials (Figure 3). The yellow color unit (unit2) is widespread in floor of the channel with mostly concentrated in the north part. The spectral character of this unit is consistent with basalt, with slightly less olivine than unit 1 (Figure 3). Average of four pixels of TES spectra indicates low-Ca pyroxene and olivine rich composition. Only limited CRISM multispectral data which are not covered the THEMIS-derived olivine-rich outcrops are available in this area, and the OLINDEX show olivine signatures in the middle of the valleys close to a large impact crater (Figure 2). Uzboi Vallis is about 400km long, 0.7-2km deep. One olivine_rich outcrops are found in the wall, the southern of Uzboi Vallis (Figure 2). The average TES spectrum is consistent with feldspar and low-Ca pyroxene rich basalt material. Only One CRISM FRT image covers the valleys and and shows Mg- and Fe-bearing clay minerals [7]. Figure 3 shows Ladon unit1 and Uzboi unit are spectrally similar to olivine rich central uplift units mapped by [2], and the Ladon unit2 is spectrally similar to pyroxene basaltic central uplift units mapped by [2]. Discussion and Future Work: Ladon Valles and Uzboi Vallis are part of the ULM outflow system (e.g. [8-9]). The lack of hydrated minerals and strong olivine signatures indicate Ladon Valles has undergone limited alteration. The similarity of olivine-rich outcrops in Unit 1 of Ladon Valles and central uplifts of impact craters in this region may suggest exposed continuous subsurface stratigraphy. The olivinebearing bedrocks are commonly found near the bottom of Ladon Valles, suggesting they may have formed an 1528.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
impervious surface and halted downward incision of the surface during the formation of the outflow channel. It is possible that the olivine-bearing bedrock may be widespread in this region and could form a continuous unit with olivine-bearing units in Valles Marineris and Ares Vallis. Detailed spectral and thermophysical investigation will be applied to Ladon Valles and Uzboi Vallis to search for olivine-rich material within ejecta of large impact craters and better constrain the subsurface distribution.  References: [1] Skok J.R. et al, (2012) JGR, 117, E00J18. [2] Pan C. et al, (2015) JGR, 120, 662-688. [3] Kraft M. D. (2014) LPSC 45th, Abstract 2933. [4] Garnt A.J. and Parker J.A. (2002) JGR, 107,E9,5066. [5] Rogers A.D. et al, (2005) JGR, 110, E05010. [6] Wilson J.H. and Mustrad J.F., (2005) JGR, 118, 916-929. [7]Parker J.A. et al, (2011) Icarus, 212,110-122. [8] Grant A.J., (2000) Geology, 28, 223-226. [9] Grant A.J. and Paker T.J., (2002) JGR, 107, E001678.  Figure 1. Study area in western Noachis Terra overlain on MOLA topography map. Red dots are valley networks and out flow channels. Red texts are names of impact craters with multiple spectral distinct units exposed within central uplifts [2].   Figure 2. Olivine-rich outcrops derived by minimum position of cubic for THEMIS data overlain on THEMIS radiance image of in Ladon Valles (A) and Uzboi Vallis (B). A. Dash arrows point to unit1 in Ladon Valles, solid arrows point to unit2 in Ladon Valles. B. Solid arrows point to olivine-rich unit in Uzboi Vallis.   Figure 3. THEMIS spectra from central uplifts [2] and outflow channels.    1528.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
