1534.PDF
GLOBAL-SCALE EXTERNAL FIELDS AT MARS MEASURED AT SATELLITE ALTITUDES: PREPARATION FOR MAGNETIC SOUNDING OF THE MARTIAN INTERIOR.  A. Mittelholz1 and C. L. Johnson1,2, 1Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada  (amittelh@eos.ubc.ca; cjohnson@eos.ubc.ca), 2Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA (cjohnson@psi.ubc.ca).   Introduction:  The martian magnetic field environment is governed by interactions among crustal remnant fields, the ionosphere, the solar wind and the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). Although the crustal field has been studied extensively, the globalscale external magnetic field has received less attention. We use Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) vector magnetic field data to map the large-scale geometry, temporal variability and magnitude of external fields at an altitude of ~400 km. We also investigate the altitude dependence of fields using data from MGS and the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution Mission (MAVEN) taken below 600 km altitude. We identify external field contributions from two sources: the IMF and the ionosphere.  The external fields vary on time scales of a day, 26 days and a year, and have a non-zero mean when averaged over multiple IMF cycles or seasons. The periodic time variations, as well as large-amplitude aperiodic timevarying signals (e.g., during interplanetary coronal mass ejections [2]), are important for the possible electromagnetic sounding of Mars.  Methods:  We use MGS mapping orbit data to investigate external field variations because of the long durations (~7 years) of measurements taken at almost constant (380 – 420 km) altitudes that sample most  body-fixed latitudes and longitudes. Local time sampling is restricted by the 2am-2pm orbit of MGS.   We predict crustal magnetic fields [1] along the satellite orbit and subtract them from the observed vector magnetic field to investigate the residual (external) fields. Temporal variability:  The residual external magnetic field is strongly time-varying and exhibits both, aperiodic and periodic signals. Orbit-to-orbit (aperiodic) variations depend on a variety of factors including solar wind conditions and crustal fields. Because of the lack of simultaneous solar wind measurements at Mars during the MGS mapping orbit phase, we focus here on periodic signals with periods that can be attributed to known physical origins.   Plots of the time series and corresponding spectral analyses confirm two characteristic periodicities: an annual cycle and an approximately 26-day cycle. The latter corresponds to the expected periodicity in the IMF measured at Mars due to solar rotation (Carrington rotations).  Figure 1 shows the magnitude, B, of the field computed from 10-day and 4-month running medians of the full vector field.  The running median uses data from 60°S to 60°N in the Mars Solar Orbital (MSO) frame. A similar pattern is observed for data selected in narrower latitude bands. The 26-day period is clearly seen in the 10-day running median, and is averaged out in the 4-month running median. After subtracting the long-term cycle from the 10-day median curve, we estimate an average magnitude of the compressed IMF at 400 km altitude of ~9 nT. This is approximately twice the magnitude of the IMF measured outside the bow shock [3].    Figure 1. Magnitude, B, of the magnetic field from a running 10-day (blue) and 4-month (black) median of the residual (vector) field for data taken between MSO latitudes 60°S and 60°N.     The third periodicity identified is the daily cycle (Figure 2). We bin the radial and horizontal components of the residual vector field (i.e. mapping orbit data with crustal fields subtracted) in 6°x6° bins geographically for the entire dataset spanning the years 2000 –2006. For daytime and nighttime data, we calculate the median vector field in each bin. The resulting nighttime residual is close to zero; the daytime residual reaches magnitudes up to 30 nT and has a distinct spatial pattern in the body-fixed frame.  Large-scale geometry: We analyze the global field in Figure 2 to investigate any correlations of the external field with geography and with crustal fields (i.e., in the Mars Body Fixed Frame, MBF). The daytime radial component in the external field is correlated with the location of crustal fields even though the predicted values of the latter at spacecraft altitude [1] have been subtracted. This effect has been noted previ1534.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
ously and likely reflects the effects of the interaction [4] of the IMF with the crustal fields locally. The colatitudinal component, Bθ, shows dominantly zonal patterns. This structure in the field is also observed for time-averages taken over shorter time intervals. However, the longitudinal component Bφ varies geographically. This average global picture of the dayside external field clearly shows the larger contributions from the horizontal components compared to the radial component.   Figure 2. The median of the global external field from 20002006 in 6°x6° bins. Daytime data are selected within local times 13-15 h, nighttime data are from 1-3 h.  Although the 2am / 2pm mapping orbit yields restricted local time coverage at low to mid latitudes, a larger range of local times is sampled at high latitudes. We thus also examined the time-averaged geometry of the external field in the MBF and MSO frame, i.e. as a function of MSO latitude (in 10° bins), and local time (in 1 hr bins).  As in the MBF frame (Figure 2), the residual fields in the MSO frame are dominated by horizontal components. Our results for the latitude band 50°-60°N in MBF are consistent with those of [5]. MSO is the preferred coordinate system for examining the relationship of external fields to solar wind conditions and the IMF, rather than geographic or crustal field dependences.  However, in MSO the results globally are difficult to interpret in terms of solely a draped IMF configuration.  MAVEN data will greatly improve existing data coverage and lead to a clearer understanding of the average geometry of the external field, its local time dependence, and the relative contributions of the IMF and ionospheric fields.  Vertical variability: We also investigated vertical structure in the median external field. We combined the aerobreaking (AB) and Science Phase Orbit (SPO) data of MGS and MAVEN data available in the PDS as of December 2015 taken below 600 km. Data from theses sources in a latitude band from 30°S to 30°N were binned into 10 km altitude bins.  In each altitude bin the median of the field was taken for 2-hour local time windows from 10 am to 10 pm. The resulting vertical profile of B in any given local time window did not show the simple altitude dependence that would be expected for upward continuation from a purely ionospheric field or a downward continuation of an IMF source.  This suggests that the observed external field is the result of superposition of fields from multiple sources. Furthermore, we did not observe a simple evolution of the field strength with local time. Conclusion and Discussion:  We observe substantial non-zero external magnetic fields at 400 km altitude, even when averaged over long timescales. Characteristic periodicities in the external magnetic field are day/night, 26 days and annual.   Time variable external fields penetrating the surface of Mars can allow electromagnetic sounding of the subsurface. External fields measured at spacecraft altitudes (e.g. by the MAVEN spacecraft currently in orbit around Mars) could be used as inducing fields.  The inducing field plus the induced response could be measured by a surface magnetometer such as the magnetometer that will be carried on the InSight lander [5]. The induced response provides a probe of martian interior electrical conductivity and, by inference, provides constraints on mineralogy and crustal/mantle water content.  Thus characterization of time varying fields using currently available data sets is an important task in preparation for future magnetic sounding of Mars.    References:  [1] A. Morschhauser et al. (2014) JGR, 90, 1151–1154. [2] B. Jakosky et al. (2015) Science, 350, 6261, 4-11. [3] D. Crider et al. (2004) Springer, 18, 203-221. [4] D. Brain (2002) Thesis, University of Colorado at Boulder  [5] D. Brain et al. (2005) Icarus, 182, 2, 464-473. [6] W. Banerdt et al. (2013) Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 44, 1915.  1534.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
