1540.PDF
A Laboratory Based Grazing Incidence X-ray Fluorescence Instrument to Study Genesis Solar Wind SamplesM. Schmeling, and J. DavidsonLoyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL 60660, mschmel@luc.eduIntroduction: The Genesis mission was the firstmission returning solar material to Earth since theApollo program [1, 2]. Unfortunately the return of thespace craft on September 8, 2004 resulted in a crashlanding, shattering the solar wind collectors into thousands of small fragments. Due to break-up of the returncapsule the collectors were also exposed to desert soiland other debris. Consequently only small fragmentsof the original collectors are available now and each ofthose has a different degree of contamination withmost of the contaminants present at the surface, butsome also embedded in the upper surface layer as result of the high velocity impact. Thorough surfacecleaning is required to allow for subsequent analysis ofsolar wind material embedded some 50-100nm belowthe surface. Various cleaning procedures were developed and are still being developed to remove particulates and a thin film organic contamination acquiredduring collection in space [3]. Total reflection X-rayfluorescence analysis (TXRF) a non-destructive andhighly surface sensitive method is employed to evaluate the cleaning process of various collector materials[4]. TXRF instrumentation uses a fixed angle of incidence for X-rays, the critical angle, to characterize andalso quantify materials deposited in micro amounts ona highly polished mirror-like surface. However, in thecase of solar wind samples some contaminant materialwas also found to be embedded within the surface andsometimes a few atomic layers below it due to the highimpact velocity. The fixed angle geometry does notpermit for identifying material at this locations andgrazing incidence X-ray fluorescence (GIXRF) capability is called for. At the moment grazing incidentmeasurements are only possible at the 13-ID-C beamline of the GeoSoilsEnviro Consortium for AdvancedRadiation Sources (GSECARS) at Argonne NationalLaboratory. The angle adjustable X-ray fluorescenceset-up at the GSECARS was already successfully employed to determine Fe fluences in silicon solar windsamples [5, 6]. Unfortunately, measurement time isvery limited and exceedingly difficult to obtain atGSECARS hence the necessity arises to build a laboratory based X-ray fluorescence instrument with comparable capability and permanent availability for solarwind samples. The somewhat reduced detection powerof the laboratory instrumentation will be off-set bylonger counting times. The laboratory set-up will feature the flexibility of analyzing under total reflectionconditions at the surface (TXRF) and also under grazing incidence (GIXRF) for probing below the surface.Figure 1 shows how fluorescence intensity changes formaterial deposited at the surface (left) and embeddedwithin the surface (right) in dependency of incidentangle [7].Figure 1: X-ray fluorescence intensity in dependence of incidentangle for material deposited on top of a mirror-like surface (left) andembedded within the top few atomic layers of a mirror-like surface(right) (after [7]).Experimental: Figure 2 shows the conceptualdrawing of the laboratory build grazing incidence Xray fluorescence spectrometer.X-ray TubeFluorescenceDetectorMonochromatorx,y,z Sample StageGoniometerReflectivityDetectorCameraFigure 2: Conceptual drawing of laboratory build grazing incidenceX-ray fluorescence spectrometer. The set-up features two detectors(fluorescence and reflectivity detector), an x,y,z stage for samplemovement, a goniometer for angle movement, and a camera forsample observation. The red line shows the path of X-rays through1540.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
the system and the purple arrows correspond to the fluorescencesignal emitted from the sample.The primary goal of the instrumentation is the ability to change the angle of the incident X-ray beam insmall continuous increments reproducibly at differentlocations of the sample. Thus the set-up must featurean x, y, z stage permitting for horizontal and heightmovement of the sample and a goniometer for tiltingthe sample with respect to the X-ray beam. All of themhave to be computer controlled. Additional components are a fluorescence detector for recording fluorescence radiation emitted from the sample and a reflectivity detector recording X-ray reflectivity at the sample surface. The X-ray reflectivity will decrease withincreasing incident angle thus providing a rough measure of beam intensity. A camera displaying the sampleitself on a screen for selection of analysis area will bepart of the set-up as well.Results and Conclusion: Figure 3 shows the current status of the instrumentation (as of January 2016)with the sample stage and goniometer already implemented.Figure 3: Current status of the GIXRF instrument. The labelscorrespond to the following items: a) goniometer and sample tablefor angle adjustment of the sample with respect to the X-ray beam;b) horizontal x,y motion stage; c) z-stage for sample height adjustment (lift stage); d) X-ray tube featuring a Mo Anode; e) monochromator; f) Si-drift X-ray fluorescence detector.To underline the capability of the future laboratoryTXRF/GIXRF instrument figure 4 shows a crude anglescan on Genesis flight sample 60234 executed on theS2Picofox® TXRF spectrometer. The S2Picofox®permits only for rough, not very reproducible anglechanges, intended for accommodation of differentsample thicknesses.Figure 4: Rough angle scan of Genesis flight sample 60234 performed with the S2Picofax® TXRF spectrometer. The angle of totalreflection is at 0.1 degrees, with the X-ray beam penetrating into thesample bulk after that.Sample 60234 consists of a ~3000 Å silicon layer epitaxially grown on polished aluminum oxide substrate.Nicely visible even in this crude scan is the Si layerstructure reflected in the Si signal peaking before theX-ray beam starts exciting the aluminum bulk. Bariumis present as surface contaminant, peaking before theangle of total reflection and Ca and Fe are probablypresent at the surface and below the surface. Whencompleted, the new TXRF/GIXRF instrument willhave a substantially better angle resolution than thisgraph shows for the S2Picofox®. It will also provideX-ray reflectivity hence monitoring X-ray penetrationinto the bulk substrate and because of the x, y motionstage, different areas of the sample can be analyzedreproducibly.References:[1] Burnett D.S. et al. (2003), Space Science Reviews, 105,509-534.[2] Jurewicz A.J.G. et al. (2003) Space Science Reviews, 105,535-560.[3] Calaway M.J. et .al. (2009), LPSC XXXX, Paper #1183.[4] Schmeling M. et. al. (2012), Adv. X-ray Anal. 55, 264271.[5] Kitts K. et al. (2009), J. Applied Phys. 105:6, 064905.[6] Kitts K. et al. (2009), LPSC XXXX, Paper #1439.[7] Schmeling M, (2013), Total Reflection X-ray Fluorescence Elsevier Ltd. www.sciencedirect.com/science/ referenceworks/9780124095472, pp. 440-448.Acknowledgements: The authors would like to expresstheir gratitude to the Genesis sample curators at Johnson Space Center. This research was supported byNASA grants NNX10AH05G and NNX14AT30G.1540.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
