 USING THE MORPHOLOGY OF IMPACT CRATERS AS A RELATIVE AGE INDICATOR FOR FLUVIAL ACTIVITY AT XANTHE TERRA, MARS. M.J. O'Shea1, N.H. Warner1, S. Gupta2, S. Eckes1, A. Werynski1, and J. SMITH1, (1) Department of Geological Sciences, SUNY Geneseo, 1 College Circle, Geneseo, NY 14454, (2) Earth Science and Engineering, Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. moshea0726@gmail.com & warner@geneseo.edu  Introduction:  The equatorial, Xanthe Terra region of Mars exhibits numerous fluvial systems that source sedimentary fans. The rivers are superposed on Late Noachian-age highland terrain [1]. The actual timing of the water flow and sediment deposition is not well known. Several sedimentary fans, including the Hypanis and Sabrina Valles deltas, are sourced from Xanthe Terra river systems and represent high priority targets for exploration. Specifically, Mars2020 and the potential human mission to Mars have considered Hypanis delta as a candidate for landing. Mars2020 requires Noachian-age materials within or near its landing ellipse to meet its science objectives of identifying evidence of a habitable environment and possibly life. Conventional crater count methods are unable to accurately and precisely constrain the timing of fluvial activity by dating the rivers and deltas themselves due to the limitations in the available area for the count and post-formational processes of crater resurfacing [2]. Therefore, other methods of relative age dating are required. Here, we utilize crater morphology, measured from High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) digital elevation models (DEMs), to establish a time series of crater degradation (Fig.1).  Figure 1: High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) (DLR) digital elevation model (DEM) coverage at 100 m grid spacing, overlain on a Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) (Arizona State University) Daytime IR (100 m) mosaic over Xanthe Terra.  This time series allows us to constrain the timing of formation of individual craters to either the Noachian or Hesperian/Amazonian epochs. Combining this metric with the superposition relationships between both craters and rivers, we establish that fluvial activity in Xanthe Terra was likely long lived, spanning the Late Noachian into the Amazonian. We further establish the age of Hypanis Valles as Late Noachian to Early Hesperian. Methods: Using the HRSC DEMs and THEMIS basemap we mapped all craters with diameters > 2 km, this includes both simple (< 7 km) and complex (> 7 km) craters. The DEMs were then used to construct topographic profiles across each crater to evaluate depth (d) and diameter (D) relationships. Our d/D data confirm 7 km as the transition from simple to complex (Fig. 2). Profiles were constructed using the 3D Analyst tool in ArcMap. Four profiles were created across each crater to estimate a mean d and D. The craters were sorted by both size and their relative state of degradation. The most pristine craters in our dataset, or Class 1 craters, were classified as those craters where the d/D ratio is 80 to 100% of the empirically-derived model ratios of [3]. The least pristine class, or Class 5 craters, were those with a d/D that has a value that is 0-20% of the model value. The d/D model of [3] was chosen for relative comparison to our dataset based on the similarity in the power-law distribution of our data (Fig. 2) to their model. In general our most pristine craters, like in [3], were found to be deeper for a given diameter than was calculated by [4] using Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA) data. Crater rim heights were also measured to tease out the influence of rim reduction in the depth data. Depthrelated degradation for a crater is dependent on both rim degradation and crater filling. We evaluate which effect is most important towards influencing the d/D ratios.  For each classification we constructed cumulative size frequency distribution (SFD) plots to constrain timescales of degradation. For example, to estimate the age of the most degraded class (Class 5) we plotted the SFD for all craters in all classes (Class 1 - 5). By fitting the data to Mars production and chronology functions [5,6] we not only estimate the age of the terrain but the maximum age of the most degraded crater on Xanthe Terra. To estimate a maximum age of the least degraded class we plotted the SFD for only Class 1 craters. We assume that Class 1 craters represent the youngest craters in the region based on their near pristine morphology. Their SFD should provide insights into the time since intense crater degradation ceased on Mars.  Results: The results of the depth and diameter measurements for 317 craters are plotted and displayed in Figure 2. Power law fits to the data are displayed for Class 1 and Class 5 craters.  Figure 2: Plot of crater depth vs diameter. Craters are separated based on size (simple vs. complex) and state of degradation. Figure 3 displays a cumulative SFD plot for Class 1 to 5 (black) and Class 1 craters only (red). The fit to all craters in our analysis provides a model age of 3.8 Ga. This confirms that the maximum age of the Xanthe Terra highland terrain is Late Noachian [1]. It also indicates that the maximum age of the most degraded craters in the region, those with model depths that are 0 to 20% of pristine, is at maximum Late Noachian. However, the plot of only those most pristine craters provides a model age fit of 3.6 Ga. This suggests that any crater that formed after 3.6 Ga, or after the Early Hesperian, exhibits a near pristine morphology.  Using these time constraints we also calculated crater degradation rates for the different crater classes. Here, we report a degradation rate of 2.0 m/Myr-1 for the most degraded Late Noachian group of impact craters from Class 5. In this calculation we assume that the bulk of the degradation for these degraded craters occurs over the 200 million year period between 3.8 Ga and 3.6 Ga. For Class 1 craters, we take the most degraded example (80% from pristine) and assume that its degradation occurred over the entirety of the 3.6 billion year period of Mars history. This degradation rate, which is representative of the Hesperian and Amazonian epochs is 0.03 m/Myr-1. We separate the terms erosion rate from degradation rate because d/D models are only sensitive to depth-related reductions. Depths of impact craters on Mars may be modified through both denudation of the rim and surrounding plains as well as crater infill. Our rim height data suggests that the bulk of the depth degradation in Xanthe is not due to planing off of the crater rim, but rather infill by either dust, fluvial/lacustrine deposits, volcanic material, or aeolian deposits.  Discussion and Conclusions: The timescales of degradation are consistent with the hypothesis of an earlier climate optimum during the Late Noachian epoch that was responsible for the bulk of the observed surface degradation on Mars.  Our results also provide  Figure 3: Cumulative size frequency distribution plot for all craters in the study region (black) and only the Class 1 craters (red). All craters on Xanthe Terra provide a model age of 3.8 Ga, or the Late Noachian. The least degraded Class 1 craters are at least 3.6 Ga in age. a metric for evaluating whether fluvial systems that interact with individual craters in Xanthe Terra are from the Noachian epoch or are representatives of a much younger time period. Using the depth and diameter data in Figure 2, a crater that shows depth-related degradation such that its d/D relationship is 80 - 100% similar to the pristine ratio is at maximum Early Hesperian (3.6 Ga) in age but possibly younger. Likewise, any crater whose d/D is further from the pristine model (< 80%) should be Early Hesperian or older. We have identified several craters at different preservation states across Xanthe Terra that both post-date and pre-date fluvial networks. Hypanis Valles for example pre-dates a complex impact crater centered at 8° 20' N, 49° 30' W [7]. The northern and southern branches of Hypanis are both superposed by the ejecta of this crater. The crater is degraded by approximately 80% of the pristine model. Based on our estimated erosion rates for Xanthe Terra, this suggests that this crater straddles the Early Hesperian to Late Noachian boundary and thus indicates that Hypanis Valles could have formed during the Late Noachian climate optimum. Interestingly, other near pristine craters in this region whose d/D ratios are close to 100% of the pristine ratio are also superposed by fluvial networks. These observations imply longer lived fluvial activity here than previously considered [8, 9].  References: References: [1] Tanaka, K.L. et al. (2014). Geologic map of mars. USGS Scientific Invest. Map 3292. [2] Warner, N. et al. (2015). Icarus. v. 245. [3] Tornabene, L. et al. (2013). 44th LPSC. 2592. [4] Garvin, J. et al. (2003). 6th Int. Conf. Mars. 3277. [5] Ivanov, B. (2001). Space Sci. Rev. 96. [6] Hartmann & Neukum et al. (2001). Space Sci. Rev. 96. [7] Eckes et al. (2016). 47th LPSC. This meeting. [8] Hauber E., et al. (2013). JGR-Planets. 118. [9] Achille, G. D. et al. (2006). JGR-Planets. 111. 