1563.PDF
Lunar Infrastructural Materials Based on Raw Lunar Soil Simulants.  T. Chen,1 B. J. Chow2, Y. Qiao1,2,*  1 Program of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California - San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093; 2 Department of Structural Engineering, University of California - San Diego, La Jolla, CA 992093-0085, (Email: yqiao@ucsd.edu).  Summary: We developed a processing technology that, by using ~96 wt% raw lunar soil simulant and ~4 wt% polymer binder, structural parts can be produced through a fast and energy-efficient procedure, with a simple and small-sized machine. The parts are much stronger than steel-reinforced concrete both in compression and in tension/flexural, and are much more durable and reliable in the harsh environment on the lunar surface. This technology also has important relevance to other planets or planetary satellites.   Importance and Relevance: A long-term goal of manned exploration missions to the Moon is to stay there, for which small-scale outposts and large-scale bases, as well as research and exploration facilities and equipment containing massive and bulky structural components, such as space telescopes, power plants, and landing and launch facilities, must be constructed on the lunar surface. The materials processing and properties must be adequately understood before further studies, including mission plan, structural design, and interior design, can be carried out.  The feasibility of using lunar soils for construction has been investigated for more than two decades. It is, theoretically, possible that, as lunar dusts of different chemical compositions are appropriately mixed together, through complicated combustion and curing procedures, "lunar cements", materials that can react with water or other liquids to form load-bearing components, can be obtained (e.g. Cox, 2000). However, to achieve this, massive and energy-consuming "cement plants" must be built on the Moon, before "lunar cements" are available. Even if this could be done, the "lunar cements", as any other ordinary cements, are of low tensile strengths, and, therefore, a large amount of metal/composite reinforcements must be used. Their long-term reliability, especially in high vacuum and high/low-temperature environment, is also problematic. Furthermore, the water or reactive chemicals necessary for the cementing process is about 30-40 wt.%; that is, for every 10 parts of "lunar cement", 3-4 parts of liquid need to be provided.  In view of these limitations, over the years, a few alternative techniques, such as direct sintering of lunar soils (Taylor and Meek, 2005), water-free sulfur cements (e.g. Toutanji et al., 2006), applications of planetary lava (McGown et al., 2002), and in-situ fabrication of glass (Tucker and Ethridge, 1998) and metals (Stefanescu et al., 1998), were proposed. However, these techniques either are energy consuming or can only yield small-sized/low-quality materials, or lack supporting data. New mechanisms must be discovered to produce high-performance lunar structural materials.    Fig.2 Only a coke-bottle of polymer binder needs to be transported from the Earth to constructure an IOH structure as large as the Low-Orbit ISS (not including the solar panels). Most of the components - the fillers - will be harvested locally from the lunar regolith.   Concept and Innovation: Recently, we developed a processing technique, through which ~96 wt% fillers (e.g. lunar soil grains) can be strongly bound together by only ~4 wt% binder, as shown in Fig.1.  The produced material is referred to as inorganicorganic hybrid (IOH). It is envisioned that the binder will be produced on the Earth, and the fillers can be harvested locally on the Moon. Thus, the burden of space transporation can be largely reduced by more than one order of magnitude. For instance, to construct an IOH structure as large as the Low-Orbit International Space Station (ISS), only one to two coke-bottle of terrestrial material (the binder) is needed (Fig.2).  According to the criteria of processability, strength-mass ratio, durability, reliability, radiation resistance, etc., the optimum binder materials are Polymer binder  (4 wt%) Raw lunar soil simulant (96 wt%) An IOH cylinder Fig.1 Raw lunar soil simulant grains can be strongly bound together by only 3-4 wt% polymer binder, to form inorganic-organic hybrid (IOH) parts - thanks to the innovative, simple and fast processing technique.  The IOH is durable and reliable in the harsh lunar environment. In compression, the strength of IOH is comparable with that of aluminum alloys; in tension or flexure, the IOH is comparable with woods or cast copper alloys; in both loading modes, the IOH is much stronger than steel-reinforced concrete. 1563.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
epoxy and engineering plastics, such as polyether ketone ketone (PEKK), that have been long employed in space applications.     Fig.5 SEM image showing that lunar soil simulant grains are strongly bound together by ~4 wt% polymer binder.   Experimental Work and Results: A key technology of IOH processing is the quasi-static mixing (QSM), specifically developed to deal with the ultralow polymer binder content. Without this technology, the polymer content has to be higher than 10-15 wt%; or the material strength would be low (e.g. Qiao et al. 2007; Chen et al., 2008; Koh et al. 2010).  We tested a few lunar soil simulants, and the QSM technique worked well for all of them. One experiment was conducted on JSC-1a lunar soil simulant and epoxy binder. The binder content ranged from 2 wt% to 6 wt%. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on the IOH samples and it confirmed that the binder distribution was uniform. The compressive strength of IOH was measured by crushing cylindrical samples quasi-statically. Depending on the binder content, it varied from ~40 MPa (compared to commercial concrete) to ~110 MPa (comparable with alumimum alloys), as shown in Fig.3. The flexural strength of IOH was measured on beam samples cut from IOH cylinders (Fig.4e), in a three-point bending setup, as depicted by the inset in Fig.4. When the binder content was only 2 wt%, the flexural strength was ~7 MPa (~900 psi), close to that of portland cement; when c was ~6 wt%, the flexural strength was ~50 MPa (~7,000 psi), higher than that of regular concrete by nearly an order of magnitude, comparable with that of hardwoods. Figure 5 shows SEM microscopy of an IOH, wherein raw lunar soil simulant grians are strongly bound together by 4 wt% epoxy binder.  Our testing data also indicate that IOH works well at low/high temperatures from -160 oC to 150 oC, covering the range on the lunar surface. More materials characterization study is still on going.  The QSM processing involves mainly physical mixing of fillers and binder, and therefore, is energyefficient. To produce 1 kg of IOH, only ~20 kJ of energy is needed. That is, 1 kWh energy is sufficient for the production of 180 kg of IOH.  Our research finding contributes to the promise of allowing economical and self-sustainable "mass production" of lunar infrastructural materials with minimum periodic supplies from the Earth. The IOH processing can be carried out either manually by an astronaut or by a simple and small-sized machine powered by solar panels.   References  Chen P, Rabin D, Van Steenberg M, Oliversen R (2008). http://www.nasa.gov/centers/goddard/news/topstory/2008/lunar_telescopes.html Cox RM (2000). In: Proceedings of Space 2000: the Seventh International Conference, Reston, VA, pp. 805-812. Koh SW, Yoo J, Bernold LE, Lee TS (2010). In: Earth and Space 2010 - Eng. Sci. Constr., and Oper in Challenging Env. McGown RD, York CL, Billings TL, Walden B (2002). In: Proceedings of Space 2002, March 17-21, 2002, Albuquerque, New Mexico, pp.155-161. Qiao Y, et al. (2007). Adv. Eng. Mater. 9, 325-327. Stefanescu DM, Grugel RN, Curreri PA (1998). In: Proceedings of the Sixth Inter. Conf. & Exp. on Eng., Const., & Operat. in Space, April 26-30, Albuquerque, NM, pp.266-274. Taylor LA, Meek TT (2005). J. Aero. Eng. 18(3), 188-196. Toutanji H, Schrayshuen B, Han M (2006). The 10th Biennial ASCE Aerospace Division Intern. Conf. on Eng., Constr. and Operat. in Challenging Env., March 5-8, League City, TX. Tucker DS, Ethridge EC (1998). In: Proceedings of the Sixth Inter. Conf. & Exp. on Eng., Const., & Operat. in Space, April 26-30, Albuquerque, NM, pp.290-300. Fig.3 Compressive strength of epoxy-based IOH. Steel reinforced concreteCu or Al alloys Unreinforced concreteFig.4 Flexural strength of IOH. Epoxybased IOH Cement Steel reinforced concrete Cast Copper alloys; hardwoods 1563.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
