1578.PDF
THE USE OF RAMAN SPECTROSCOPY FOR THE 2015 CANMARS MSR ANALOGUE MISSION.  A. Mittelholz1, M. Maloney2, G. R. Osinski2,3, 1Dept. of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver (amittelh@eos.ubc.ca), 2Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, University of Western Ontario (mmalon@uwo.ca), 3Dept. Earth Sciences / Dept. Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada  Introduction:  The 2015 CanMars Mars Sample Return (MSR) mission is a project carried out in partnership with the Canadian Space Agency, MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd. (MDA), and the Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX) at the University of Western Ontario (UWO), as part of the NSERC CREATE project "Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration" (create.uwo.ca) [1]. A rover situated in an unknown area in Utah, an often-used analogue site for Mars [e.g.,1], was controlled by a group of students and postdoctoral fellows at UWO. The mission simulation with MESR (Mars Exploration Science Rover), was the most comprehensive and realistic analogue missions ever conducted in Canada. The simulation was run as a training exercise in preparation for the Mars 2020 mission and subsequent Mars Sample Return missions. The science objectives for the analogue mission reflected the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group (MEPAG) goals concerning past and present habitability, climate, origin and evolution of the geological system, and mission operation for human exploration [2]. Although this is a sample return mission, the retrieval and analysis of the samples can only be conducted with a large temporal offset. However, data gathered by the rover's on-board instrumentation is available. As such we will discuss the dataset collected by the Raman spectrometer, our interpretations of this data, and the problems associated with this kind of field instrument. Raman spectrometry:  A Raman spectrometer was included in the rover payload to simulate the use of the SuperCam [3] instrument during the Mars 2020 mission, which will also include a Raman spectrometer. Raman offers a non-destructive way of obtaining geochemical information about the area. The instrument can be used up to a 13 m range without deploying the rover arm and therefore offers the opportunity to obtain data from the near surroundings in a time and energy efficient way which is essential due to resource limitation in space exploration [4].  Orbital spectral and imagery data provides a regional context and is used to predict the geology of the area prior to mission operation. Conclusions drawn by the science team based on precursor satellite data predicted a sedimentary basin with paleochannels capped by basalt.   Raman data interpretation:  The program "CrystalSleuth - RRuff" [5] was used for interpretation of Raman data. The program contains a database of known mineral spectra, which was compared to the data profiles obtained by the rover from the each location. Comparing the unknown data to known mineral spectra allowed for interpretations of which minerals may be present.  The sampled area is shown in Fig. 1 and throughout the mission, a characteristic profile was observed at indicated points of interest suggesting similar mineralogy of the region or possibly a similar coating or weathering of the surfaces. An example is given in Fig. 2 showing the spectrum of Thrymheim. However, a slightly different profile was observed at two locations: Tesseract and Fimbulvetr. Both of these profiles contained abundant background noise, reducing data quality and making interpretations of the spectra more difficult and less reliable.   Figure 2.  The normalized Raman profile for Thrymheim   Soil samples resulted in inconsistent data with strong background noise which is probably due to pore space in unconsolidated material. However, when comparing Figure 1. 60 cm/pixel Quickbird satellite image of the CanMars MSR Analogue Mission landing site (red) and points of interest were measurements were taken (blue).   Base image credit: DigitalGlobe. 1578.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
soil and outcrop profiles, the main peaks seem to loosely correspond in both data sets. We therefore interpret soil to be a weathering product of the outcrops close to the sampling location. The recurring profile showed good fits with gypsum, wollastonite, pyroxmangite and K-feldspars. Other profiles suggested the presence of hematite in places (e.g., Sif), as well as quartz (e.g., Fimbulvetr). However, due to the high amount of background noise, and a lack of more efficient and accurate data processing software, these interpretations come with a degree of uncertainty.  Geology of the landing site:  The data acquired through Raman spectroscopy and the interpretations of possible mineralogy that have been made can provide some insight into the geological history of the landing area. Some of the possible mineral identifications suggest a history that includes larger bodies of water. For example gypsum and hematite can both precipitate out of lake and seawater. However, hematite can also be formed due to weathering processes.  The potential identification of wollastonite can have implications for the regional geology in this area. Wollastonite forms as a result of thermal metamorphism or due to hydrothermal activity and requires the presence of calcite and quartz. If this mineral is present here, it could offer a partial explanation of the large dome-like feature seen to the west of the landing site in the orbital images. It could suggest that this dome structure is the result of an igneous intrusion.  The presence of minerals such as quartz and K-feldspars are good indicators of detrital sedimentary rocks. This supports the idea of this area being part of a sedimentary basin.  The analysis of the capping unit and the lack of igneous material at these sites disprove the initial idea of basalt. The layer was revealed to be a conglomerate on top of the more fine grained materials below. These conglomerate layers were observed at various altitudes and indicate multiple episodes of high-energy channel formation following low-energy mudstone deposition. For a more detailed geological discussion, please refer to the companion abstract [6] from this meeting. Lessons learned:  Use of the remote sensing science instruments can be a highly effective means of acquiring information about the surrounding area. However, several challenges were identified when using the Raman spectrometer.  High amounts of background noise were an issue during the mission. Some of the data obtained was unable to be analyzed or was highly unreliable as a result.  This could be result of conditions around the site, operator error, or unconsolidated sample targets. We observe a consistent lack of useable spectra when probing soil or inconsistent surfaces. This limits us, specifically in interpreting terrain which is not part of a consolidated target such as outcrops. A further drawback is that the detection of clays by Raman spectroscopy is difficult due to the effects of fluorescence. This may have added to the difficulties associated with data interpretations when in an area suspected to contain clay. One of the main advantages of Raman spectroscopy is the ability to detect organics. However, due to the lack of a sophisticated database or software, specifically for organic molecules, identification of organics was difficult. Overall, identifying minerals and organics is a major challenge. Better software for data analysis may allow for better data processing. Cooperation of different instruments is essential in order to interpret results. Using XRF and Raman in concert is an especially effective way of comparing data. Data points were usually taken at similar or identical locations and the quantitative analysis of XRF gave a good idea about elements within the sample [7]. This helped provide a better starting point for selecting mineral candidates for identification with Raman. An additional future task will be a cross-check with the chemical analysis of the returned sample. This will give us with an idea about downlinked data quality and following analysis. Conclusions:  As slope or untraversable terrains do not allow for data acquisition with contact science instruments, remote Raman proved to be an essential part of the payload. More in depth analysis with instruments such as TEMMI or XRD turned out to be rather problematic during the mission, which resulted in XRF and Raman being the most important contributors in terms of geochemical analysis. Geochemistry is the basis for achieving many of the MEPAG goals that were identified as objectives for this mission. With the help of Raman spectroscopy, important data regarding the geochemistry and mineralogy of the area was able to be collected, analyzed, and interpreted. Overall, this contributed to the understanding of the geology of the landing site, aided in the search for habitable areas, and provided crucial information for identifying high priority scientific samples for retrieval.  Acknowledgments: This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada's CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency.   References: [1] Osinski et al. (2016) LPS XLVII. This conf. [2] Williams et al. (2011) GSA 483, 483505. [3] Maurice et al. (2015) EPSC 2015-185, Vol.10 [4] Caudill et al. (2016) LPS XXXIII. This conf. [5] Estrada (2007) RMAG 55, 1-8 [6] Pontefract et al. (2016) LPS XXXIII. This conf. [7] Caudill et al. (2016) LPS XXXIII. This conf. 1578.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
