 THE FATE OF HYDROXYL AND WATER ON THE LUNAR SURFACE OVER TIME.  G. Y Kramer1 & J.-Ph. Combe2; 1 Lunar & Planetary Science Institute, Houston, TX, kramer@lpi.usra.edu, 2 Bear Fight Institute, Winthrop, WA. Introduction The discovery of hydroxyl (OH) and water (HOH)* across the lunar surface and its fluctuation with the lunar diurnal cycle has been cited as one of the more important discoveries from the Moon in the last 40 years [2, 3, 4]. This discovery potentially portends a solar system-wide phenomenon, and the elucidation of key factors that likely influence its presence on the Moon can be expected to provide improved insight into the volatile history and potential availability of water throughout the inner solar system. There is evidence to support the conclusion that specific soil characteristics favor retention of OH and HOH which, in turn, would have strong implications for an improved understanding of the history of volatiles during planetary accretion. In addition, understanding those specific conditions that favor creation and retention of OH and HOH could be used to develop technologies that would help to provide access to, or even generate, this precious resource for human exploration. Geometric/Temporal Correlation Spectral reflectance observations by the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) showed spectral absorptions at 2.8 μm and 3.0 μm indicative of the presence of OH and HOH, respectively. Furthermore, M3 showed that both OH and HOH vary spatially as a function of solar illumination geometry [2]. At high solar incidence angles, the observed strengths of the spectral features are stronger than at low incidence angles, suggesting that the abundance varies with the diurnal cycle [2, 5]. Furthermore, these features increase with increasing latitude, such that above ~60º there is little change in the depth of the water-related spectral absorption bands. It was immediately recognized that the widespread occurrence of hydroxyl and water across the lu nar surface was the result of solar wind-induced hydroxylation [5], which was predicted almost 50 years ago [6]. The means by which water and hydroxyl form and are retained on the Moon is a question that is still being explored. Laboratory experiments demonstrated the importance of understanding how solar wind ions interact with surface materials [7, 8], and what kind of bonding would be observed as hydroxyl and water in reflectance spectra [5]. Compositional Correlation The ability of mineral and glass surfaces to internally host or surficially adsorb OH is a function of * For water to be stable under the lunar surface conditions discussed here it is likely to be in its dissociative form - as an adsorbed hydroxyl and an adsorbed hydrogen atom [1]. Therefore, we use the abbreviation HOH (instead of H2O) to be clear about the form of water measured with M3 data and discussed herein. several interrelated variables, such as composition, surface roughness, and degree of crystallinity. These properties of the material will affect observed band depths in remote sensing measurements. Maps obtained for the whole Moon using M3 data show an apparent correlation between OH/HOH and crustal lithology [2, 4, 5]. For example, high-albedo feldspathic materials generally exhibit stronger OH and HOH absorption features. This apparent association between OH/HOH abundance and lithology can be due to one or more of the following: 1) OH and HOH abundances are actually higher in the more feldspathic materials, 2) Multiple reflections in the surfaces of the highlands may create stronger absorption bands because of a more rugged topography, 3) Multiple-scattering is greater in the higher-albedo regolith (due to a lower absorption coefficient), which enhances the absorption bands, 4) Spectra generally increase in reflectance as particle size decreases due to the relative increase in volume to surface scattering. Thus, the strength of the OH and HOH absorptions increase with decreasing particle size for a given water content [9]; 5) The thermal correction applied to level 2 M3 data does not accurately account for the physical properties that give rise to the albedo of a material, thereby causing absorption bands at 2.8 and 3.0 μm to apparently be weaker in dark materials. [e.g. 10, 11]. Thermal Correction At temperatures >250 K thermal emission overwhelms the reflected energy at wavelengths longer than ~2.3 μm, and thus fills and distorts the absorption bands associated with H/OH. Ideally, this would be mitigated by the thermal correction applied to reflectance spectra, however, there is strong evidence that the strategies for the thermal correction in the level 2 M3 data currently in the PDS does not accurately account for the extent of the thermal contribution to the measured spectrum. The abundance of OH/HOH is proportional to the depths of these absorption bands. Without an improved thermal correction for M3 data, efforts to accurately estimate the abundance of these volatiles, or the properties of the soil with which their presence correlates, cannot be truly realized. Our long term research goal is to determine the properties of the lunar soil that favor the formation and retention of OH and HOH within the inner solar system. This dictates a preliminary goal of improving the accuracy of the currently-used thermal emission model for M3 spectral reflectance data. To improve the thermal emission correction, we consider that the local surface roughness within an M3 pixel creates a distribution of temperatures, not a uniform temperature.  Modeling the thermal emission contribution [12]) using High resolution Digital Elevation Model (DEM) from Lunar Orbiter Camera (LROC) and Lunar Laser Altimeter (LOLA), and surface roughness derived from the Diviner thermal imaging spectrometer, is more accurate than performing a correction solely based on M3 spectra. Areas of Interest Because improving the thermal correction is a long, complicated and iterative process, we begin by focusing on specific locations where M3 data shows differences in OH and HOH content between regions of different compositions which have similar albedo (same average reflectance between 0.4 and 2.1 microns - outside the range of thermal emission). This includes materials that may have different absorption bands of minerals, or different depths of the same absorption bands of minerals. In this way we can determine the mineral compositions that favor the retention of hydroxyl and water. At the completion of this preliminary project, we will have generated and implemented an improved thermal correction for M3 data selected for this preliminary project. These data will accurately represent the reflectance portion of the spectrum beyond 2.2 μm, and that these improved reflectance spectra will allow us to accurately characterize the absorption bands diagnostic of the presence of OH and HOH in materials of similar albedo, but different composition. The successful completion of this project can, therefore, be expected to have an important positive impact on current understanding of the lunar water cycle, compositional and maturity properties of the soil that influence this phenomenon, and can serve as a guide for paths of future exploration and technology development. This project will answer the questions: 1. Is the abundance of surficial OH/HOH increasing or decreasing over time (with maturity of the soil)? 2. Does the abundance of OH/HOH vary as a function of different soil compositions (mineralogy)? Do we see the same effects on the maria and high lands? 3. Is there a difference in behavior/retention of OH/HOH with different soil textures (e.g., crystalline versus glassy, pyroclastics, swirls)? References [1] Hibbitts C. A. et al. (2011) Icarus 213, 64-72; [2] Pieters C. M. et al. (2009) Science 326, 568-572; [3] Sunshine J. et al. (2009) Science 326, 565-568; [4] Clark R. N. (2009) Science 326, 562-564; [5] McCord T. B. et al. (2011) JGR 116; [6] Zeller E. J. et al. (1966) JGR 71, 4855-4860; [7] Zent A. P. et al. (2010) LPSC XLI, Abstract #2665; [8] Burke D. et al. (2011) Icarus 211, 1082-1088; [9] Milliken R. E. and Mustard J. F. (2007) Icarus 189, 574-588; [10] Milliken R. E. and Mustard J. F. (2005) JGR 110; [11] Milliken R. E. and Mustard J. F. (2007) Icarus 189, 550-573. [12] Bandfield J.L. and Edwards C.S. (2008), Icarus 193, 139-157. Figure 1: M3 images showing two small craters of approximately equal size (~600 m in diameter - width of (a), (b), and (c) is 60 km) that impacted the same target material (a) and with slightly different maturity (b) have ejecta with very different OH abundances (c). Spectra in (e) show the increased OH abundance (increased 2.82 μm band depth) moving from the ambient abundance of the surrounding mature regolith (d). 