1596.PDF
2015 CANMARS MSR ANALOGUE MISSION: MISSION CONTROL TEAM STRUCTURE AND OPERATIONS.  M. C. Kerrigan1 and G. R. Osinski1,2, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, Department of EarthScience, University of Western Ontario, 2Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, LondonON, Canada. mkerrig@uwo.ca Introduction:  The 2015 CanMars MSR AnalogueMission is a  Mars Sample Return Analogue Missioncarried out in partnership between the Canadian SpaceAgency (CSA), MacDonald, Dettwiler and AssociatesLtd. (MDA), and the Centre for Planetary Science andExploration (CPSX) at the University of Western Ontario (UWO), as part of the NSERC CREATE project“Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration” (create.uwo.ca) [1].Over  50  participants  from  6  institutions  dividedinto  3  teams worked  on  this  analogue  mission.  TheMission Control  (MC) team, responsible for  the science planning, processing, and interpretion, was basedat UWO in London Ontario. The CSA team, with responsibility  for  the  Mars  Exploration  Science  Rover(MESR) operations was based at CSA headquarters inMontreal. The MESR was deployed at a remote Marsanalogue  location  in  Utah,  USA,  with  a  Field  teamcomprising CSA engineers and geologists from UWO.Pre-deployment  team planning:  This  analoguemission was the third in a series of four CREATE analogue missions. CPSX was also previously involved ina series of analogue missions with the CSA in 20102011 [2]. The lessons learned from previous missionswere reviewed as a way to ensure their application intothe  planning  of  this  mission.  The  main  recurringlessons noted  were the need for  mission goals  madeclear to all participants (detailed in [1]), and clear teamorganisation and training prior to the deployment operations. The structure of the MC team for this missionwas based on these past analogue missions, and in particular on a mission architecture as detailed in [3, 4].The MC team was organized into three sub-teams;Science, Planning, and Tactical. Each sub-team had aTeam Lead to manage the activities of the team andlead discussions, a documentarian to record all activities,  and  decisions made,  and various other  assignedroles. Also part of the MC team was the Education andPublic  Outreach (EPO) lead and the Mission Operations Manager (MOM). The EPO lead had responsibility for  all  media contact,  social  media presense,  andoutreach activities [5]. The MOM – the first author onthis abstract – was responsible for the pre-deploymentteam planning, overseeing the MC team activities during the deployment, ensuring all roles were staffed, andacting as the main point of contact between the MC,CSA, and Field teams.Science  team. The  Science  team was  the  largestsub-team with 18 members. Each instrument (see [1]for payload details) was assigned two team members toshare the work load of creating the daily instrument sequence,  verifying  the  health  of  all  expected  and  received data products, creating accessible data productsfor use in Science and Planning discussions, and providing  preliminary  scientific  interpretations  and  hypotheses for recent results and overall mission results(see [6] for science results). There were also four GISteam members responsible for the processing of all remote sensing data products, mapping of proposed andactual traverses, annotated images of target locations,and localization of all activities.Planning team. This team had 5 members. In addition  to  the  planning  lead  and  documentarian,  therewere two daily activity planners [7], and one long-termplanner. The Planning team was responsible for developing the daily and strategic plan with Science whileensuring the planned operations were in line with thetime, power, and data budgets, and within the engineering constraints [8]. Tactical team. There were 4 members of the Tactical  Team including  the  lead  and  documentarian  [9].The Uplink role integrated all instrument sequences received from Science to be uplinked to the rover. TheDownlink and Data Management role reviewed all dataproducts received from the rover, managed file structures and ensured proper archiving of all mission data.Software training and ORT.  Symphony is a  environmental simulation software package designed by theCSA [7]. It was used during a previous analogue mission by many of the participants but had been furtherdeveloped  and  changed  that  hands-on  training  withSymphony for the MC team prior to the 2015 deployment was essential. This was carried out at UWO withaccess  for  remote participants,  in October  2015,  followed by an operational readiness test (ORT). This involved the MC team planning and sequencing a day ofrover operations and the CSA team validating and executing this plan. This was repeated for two additionaldays. The Symphony software was available to all participants  and  participants  also  organized  peer-to-peertraining before the start of the deployment.Pre-deployment science planning. Six weeks beforethe deployment the MC team received remote sensingdata products covering the landing ellipse and largerregional area [10]. Four weeks before deployment theMC team had  a  science  planning meeting held  overthree days. This allowed the team to begin to get familiar with the mission goals, discuss potential investiga1596.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tions, start developing science hypotheses, and identifing areas of interest in the landing ellipse. Daily  operational  workflow:  The  deploymenttook place between Nov 15th and Nov 27th 2015. During this period the MC team worked morning (7 am–10am) and evening (7 pm–10 pm) shifts every day. Thefollowing briefly outlines the daily operational workflow for the MC team. More detailed descriptions onthis can be found in [8], [9], and [11].Evening shift. 1) Downlink: the evening shift beganwith receiving the  Sol  N-1  downlink from the  Fieldteam. This included all the science data, as well as a report from the Field team detailing any anomolies or deviations from the Sol N-1 plan.  2) Science processingand  interpretation: preliminary  work  on  the  sciencedata was carried out while the Science team began discussing the priorities for Sol N. 3) Planning: when theScience team had come to a consensus on the scienceprioroties for Sol N the Planning and Tactical  teamswould join the discussion to provide input and finalisethe plan. 4) Sequencing: with a plan agreed to the teammembers with instrument activities on Sol N began sequencing. All necessary sequences, annotated images,FOI coordinates, and other information were then intergreted  to  a  final  spreadsheet  to  be  uplinked  in  themorning.Morning shift. 5)  Refinement: the morning beganwith  a  run  through  of  the  Sol  N  plan  noting  anychanges that  would need to be made.  6)  Uplink: theplan  would  be  adjusted  accordingly and  at  8am uplinked to the CSA team for a final check.  7) Plan Review Telecon: at 8:30am the MC team and CSA teamwould review the plan together and clarify any remaining issues. The plan was then passed to the Field teamand  Sol  N  rover  operations  began.  8)  Sol  N+1  PrePlanning: the MC team would spend the  rest  of  themorning pre-planning Sol N+1 based on the expectedSol N downlink. The Science team would also reviewthe Sol N-1 data again with further science interpretation discussion.Troubleshooting  and  Evaluation.  During  theevening and morning shifts the MOM was on hand atMission Control to make note of and evaluate the mission activities, the efficiency of the workflow, and theteam dynamics.  As the point  of  contact  between theMC, CSA, and Field teams, the MOM was also in a position to pass  questions and relevant  information between the teams and troubleshoot any issues that arose. Evolution of team structure:  The MC team roleswere assigned, with the input of the participants themselves, based on their expertise and interest. It was anticipated that during the deployment roles may be expanded or combined. This did indeed happen and wasmost evident among the Planning and Tactical teams.By the second week of the deployment these teams hadeffectively  combined.  Planning  and  Tactical  teammembers worked very closely together and were ableto efficiently adjust their workflow and cover for eachother if needed. Evaluation and lessons learned:  The pre-deployment Symphony training and ORTs were invaluable inhelping the teams better understand and refine the operational workflow. However, the team roles were defined  long  before  this.  In  the  future  a  well  definedworkflow needs to be in place earlier to feed into theteam structure itself. This may also allow a rearrangingof the shifts the MC team work. Early mornings andlate nights every day for two weeks is as long as participants should be expected to efficiently and effectivelywork. As future analogue missions will have longer deployments, team and workflow organization will needto account for shifts and/or roles being covered by multiple different teams. As future analogue missions are  also expected tohave more remote participants on the MC team an effective line of communication is needed.  During thisanalogue mission the MC team used the online teamcollaboration tool Slack for messaging and file sharing.It proved to be very useful and intuitive and in the future teams should become familiar with all its featuresto use it full capabilities.The best way to carry forward lessons learned to future missions is to do so with the participants themselves. The MC team was made up of undergraduates,graduate students, and post doctoral fellows with varying mission experience and expections and so all participants provided full reports on their role within twoweeks of the end of the deployment. With commentsand recommendations from all we will be able to makeany organizational and operational changes necessaryto ensure the success of future analogue missions.References: [1]  Osinski  G.  R.,  et  al.  (2016)  LPSCXLVII,  (this  conference)  [2]  Marion  C.  L.,  et  al.  (2012)LPSC XLIII [3] Moores J., et al. (2012) Advances in SpaceResearch  10.1016/j.asr.2012.05.008  [4]  Francis  R.,  et  al.(2012) Global Space Exploartion Conference [5]  Hill  P.  J.A., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII,  (this conference) [6] Pontefract  A.,  et  al.  (2016)  LPSC XLVII,  (this  conference)  [7]Sapers H. M., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII,  (this conference)[8] Cross M. D. G., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, (this conference) [9] Silber E. A., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, (this conference) [10] Morse Z. R., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII,  (thisconference) [11] Francis R., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, (thisconference)Acknowledgments:  This work was funded by theNatural Sciences and Engineering Research Council ofCanada’s CREATE program and the Canadian SpaceAgency.1596.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
