1600.PDF
CHARACTERIZING THE EVOLUTION OF MARS SOUTH POLAR JETS AND FANS USING CRISMTHEMIS OBSERVATIONS. E. A. O'Neel-Judy1, 2 and T. Titus2,1Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ, 86001 2USGS Astrogeology Science Center, 2255 North Gemini Dr. Flagstaff, AZ, 86001  Introduction: Each winter, approximately 25% of the Martian atmosphere freezes into a seasonal CO2 ice cap on the North or South Pole [1]. In 2000, Malin et al. observed dark fans and spots that appeared in the seasonal cap during the spring thaw [2]. In the same year, Kieffer presented a conceptual model for the formation of dark fans and spots during the spring retreat of the seasonal caps; hypothesizing that the formation of dark fans and spots was the result of cold CO2 gas jets [3].  The Jet model. As the sun rises over the South Pole, sunlight penetrates the CO2 cap and heats particulate contaminants in the ice. This causes the contaminants to either sink through the ice sheet or to “float” to the top, eventually to be removed from the ice altogether. This process results in a translucent CO2 cap that allows solar flux through to the bottom of the ice. As the dark ground below becomes warmer, the underside of the ice begins to sublime. CO2 gas pressure increases and eventually explodes upward through the sheet, resulting in a CO2 jet. During jet activity, fine particulates from beneath the ice become entrained in the gas flow; and are carried upward in the jet to form dark spots and fans on the surface. Fan Length. Several factors contribute to the length of fans. Jet velocity, a function of gas pressure, determines how much dust becomes entrained in the jet, as well as the maximum height of the jet. Wind strength and local topography then determine how far from the base of the jet the dust is carried.  Our Approach. In this study we use images from the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM) and the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) to measure fan lengths. Observations of fan length are compared with solar insolation, estimated ice thickness and wind speed estimates from the NASA Ames Mars General Circulation Model (MGCM) [4]. We want to determine which of these two factors, gas pressure or wind speed, is the greatest contributor to fan length. Data and Methodology: Three Regions of Interest (ROIs), informally named Manhattan Island, Giza and Finger Lake were analyzed. Coordinates for each ROI are given in Table 1. CRISM Data. CRISM is a hyperspectral imaging camera with a wavelength range of 0.3 - 4 microns [4]. CRISM's highest spatial resolution is 15-19 meters per pixel. We primarily used Full Resolution Targeted (FRT) images.  THEMIS Data. THEMIS VIS is a visiblewavelength camera that observes at resolutions of up to 18m/pixel [5], similar to that of a CRISM FRT. THEMIS VIS provided additional seasonal coverage of the ROIs.  Table 1:ROIs Region Name Latitude Longitude Images used Manhattan Island 85°S 102°E 13 Giza 84°S 65°E 8 Finger Lake 84°S 119°E 6  MGCM Output. We use outputs from MGCM to estimate wind speed near our ROIs. MGCM uses a cylindrical grid with a singularity at the pole [6], causing ROIs poleward of ~85° to lack north/south wind components. To estimate wind speeds at these locations, we selected output for Latitude 80° from MGCM. Because of this approximation, we should emphasize that MGCM provides only an estimate of local wind speeds and directions within each ROI. For our study we examined midday wind speeds, which we processed through a ten day box filter. Midday is when we expect solar flux to be at a maximum, thereby maximizing jet activity. The box filter shows the general trends observed in wind strength, making the analysis clearer.    Figure 1. Arrows drawn showing direction of fans in CRISM image FRT-460B. This image was aquired 1600.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
over Giza; south is up. Lengths of each arrow are averaged into a single data point for this image. Methodology. Vectors indicating fan direction and length were drawn on fans in both CRISM and THEMIS images (Fig. 1). These arrows were then averaged for each image and plotted as functions of season for each region (Fig. 2). These plots do not contain data from Manhattan. This is because Manhattan exhibits trends of fan length and direction that are influenced by Manhattan’s unique topography. Analysis of this region is ongoing.  Figure 2. Average fan length of Finger Lake and Giza plotted as a function of Solar Longitude (Ls). Black is Finger Lake, green is Giza. The first increase in length occurs around Ls=185° for both regions. A second increase occurs at about Ls=225° for both regions. Standard deviation bars are plotted for each data point.  Results: By averaging the direction and length of fans in each image, we were able to plot seasonal changes as a function of Ls. (Fig. 2) MGCM output of local wind speed is shown in Figure 3. Our data shows that around Ls = 185-195° fan length increases, and occurs again at Ls = 225°. The average increase in length varies with region. At Ls = 225° we see that increases in wind speed and fan length are correlated. These trends are observed in all three regions of interest, although they are most pronounced in Giza. Although Manhattan also conformed to this trend, topographical factors play a significant role in jet formation there. The role of topography in jet formation requires further analysis.   Discussion:  Increases in wind speed and fan length are correlated at Ls = 225° for both Giza and Finger Lake regions. This implies that the stronger regional winds influenced fan length. Giza had both longer fan lengths and greater wind speeds than Finger Lake from Ls = 215° to Ls = 225°.  Both fan lengths and wind speeds decrease beginning at Ls = 245°, however Giza’s fan lengths appear to be decreasing already. By this time, most of the CO2 ice has sublimed from the seasonal cap [6] and any remaining ice is expected to be thin. Areas with thinner ice are unable to support higher levels of CO2 gas pressure, and thus jet velocity is expected to be lower or nonexistent. This may explain the decrease of Giza’s average jet length prior the regional drop of wind speeds. This would imply that ice thickness can also act as a control upon jet length. We do not have data for Finger Lake during this period and therefore cannot determine the late-season trends for this region. Results from this study indicate surface wind speed and subsurface gas pressure provides constraints of fan characterization, and by extension, jet behavior.  Figure 3: Midday wind speed output from MGCM where a 10-day box filter has been applied. Black is Finger Lake, green is Giza. The wind speed for Finger Lake is relatively constant until Ls=220°, when wind strength increases. In Giza, wind strength continually increases until Ls=245°. By Ls=250°-255°, wind strength begins to decrease in both regions. Acknowledgements: We would like to thank the NASA Space Grant for providing this research opportunity, as well as the THEMIS/Odyssey and CRISM/MRO project offices.   References: [1] Tillman, J. E., Johnson N. C., Guttorp P., and Percival D. B.  (1993) JGR, 98, 963971. [2] Edgett, K. S., Supulver, K.D., Malin, M. C. Interntional Conference on Mars Polar Science and Exploration. [3] Kieffer, H. H. (2000), In 2nd International Conference on Mars Polar Science and Exploration. [4] Haberle, R. M. (1999) J. Geophys. Res. 104(E4),8957–8974 [5] Christensen, P. R. et al. , (2004) 110, Issue 1, p.85-130 [6] Titus,T.N., Cushing, G.E. (2014) Eighth International Conf. on Mars. 1600.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
