1618.PDF
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE GEOLOGIC EVOLUTION OF CERES, DERIVED FROM GLOBAL GEOLOGIC MAPPING OF LINEAR FEATURES.  J. E. C. Scully1, C. A. Raymond1, D. L. Buczkowski2, D. P. O'Brien3, G. Mitri4, S. D. King5, C. T. Russell6, T. Platz7, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA (jennifer.e.scully@jpl.nasa.gov), 2JHU-APL, Laurel, MD, USA, 3PSI, Tucson, AZ, USA, 4University of Nantes, Nantes, France, 5Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA, 6UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 7MPI for Solar System Research, Göttingen, Germany.   Introduction and previous work: NASA's Dawn spacecraft is currently orbiting Ceres, a dwarf planet and the largest object in the asteroid belt (mean diameter of ~940 km). On March 6th 2015, Dawn became the first spacecraft to visit Ceres, which was formerly studied by telescopic observations and geochemical modeling [e.g. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5].  The Dawn Science Team has studied Ceres' physical properties, geology and composition. Initial scientific results include the identification of bright spots on Ceres' surface, the brightest of which are located within the floor of Occator crater and may be sublimating [6]. The average surface composition of Ceres is consistent with a mixture of ammoniated phyllosilicates, antigorite, carbonate and a dark component [7]. In addition, there are prominent linear features on Ceres' surface, in the form of grooves and chains of pits/craters. One particular set of linear features, provisionally called the Regional Linear Structures, has been initially interpreted as a fracture system, possibly formed by internally driven tectonics [8]. Many of the remaining linear features are initially interpreted to result from the formation of impact craters [8].  Here we present a global geologic map of linear features on Ceres. We use this map as the basis of our detailed classification of all sets of linear features observed to date, and the interpretation of their formation mechanisms. We identify cross-cutting relationships between the sets of linear features and other geologic features, and use this to develop a global geologic history focusing on the contribution of the linear features to the geologic evolution of Ceres.  Methods: Ceres science data are primarily acquired during three orbital phases of progressively lower altitude: Survey, High Altitude Mapping Orbit (HAMO) and Low Altitude Mapping Orbit (LAMO). The acquisition of Survey and HAMO data was completed by the submission of this abstract, along with the collection of initial LAMO data. Therefore, our global geologic map of linear features is based on a ~140 m/pixel HAMO global mosaic of clear filter Dawn Framing Camera images [produced by the methods outlined in 9]. Additional mapping will be undertaken in regions of interest using the ~35 m/pixel LAMO Framing Camera images. We also use Framing Camera color filter images and topography data, derived from the Framing Camera images, to inform the geologic mapping.  Results: Overview and global distribution. In Figure 1, grooves are mapped as red lines and chains of pits/craters are mapped as yellow lines. Generally, the linear features, in the form of grooves and chains of pits/craters, are evenly distributed across Ceres' surface. However, fewer linear features are mapped in some regions: (1) from ~70-90 °N and ~65-90 °S because of inappropriate illumination conditions, and (2) in selected equatorial regions, some of which are associated with the widespread smooth material around Kerwan crater [e.g. 10].  We observe grooves to transition into chains of pits/craters, and that these linear features are commonly organized into sub-parallel sets. Thus, we interpret that the grooves and chains of pits/craters are end-members that lie at either end of a continuum.  Intra-crater grooves (green lines in Figure 1) is the provisional name we give to distinctive sets of linear features that we map, using HAMO data, inside and in association with some of the most geologically fresh impact craters: Azacca, Dantu, Ezinu, Occator, Urvara, and Yalode craters. However, in initial LAMO data, some intra-crater grooves appear to be chains of pits rather than grooves, and we also observe intra-crater grooves within additional craters, such as Haulani. We are currently investigating the formation mechanism of intra-crater grooves.   Grooves and crater chains interpreted as ejecta ray systems. Morphologically fresh craters such as Dantu and Occator are the centers of radial sets of grooves and chains of pits/craters. Thus, we propose these linear features are ejecta ray systems, which commonly form when material is ejected at low angles during impact crater formation, and bounces and scours across the surface. Thus, in this case, the chains are chains of secondary craters, and not chains of pits. Furthermore, unlike pits, some of these secondary craters have visible rims. In future work, we plan to identify further sets of radial grooves and crater chains that form ejecta ray systems.   Grooves and pit chains interpreted as fractures. The most prominent set of grooves and chains of pits/craters is centered near Erntedank Planum. In this work, we map this set of linear features as a band that extends from ~140 °E to ~320 °E, and ~50 °N to ~25 °S. Future LAMO-based mapping will further refine the boundaries of this set of linear features. In agreement with [8], we interpret these linear features 1618.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
as the surface expression of sub-surface fractures, which form as surficial materials drain into the subsurface [e.g. 11], because of characteristics such as en echelon patterns.  Thus, in this case, the chains are chains of pits, and not chains of secondary craters. We also informally call this set of linear features the Regional Linear Structures (RLS).  Cross-cutting relationships.  1. Occator. The RLS are partially buried/cross-cut by ejecta, grooves and secondary crater chains from Occator crater. Thus, Occator crater likely formed after the RLS. We are currently investigating the possibility that subsurface fractures (part of the RLS) may be conduits that could allow for the upward flow of the material that forms the Occator bright spots.  2. Dantu. The ejecta from Dantu crater also appears to partially bury/cross-cut the RLS. 3. Ahuna Mons. Ahuna Mons is a ~4 km high solitary mountain that is interpreted as a viscous extrusive dome [12].  The southeasterly part of the RLS borders the western rim of Ahuna Mons. Using LAMO Framing Camera images, we observe the northwestern rim of Ahuna Mons to cross cut one of the RLS grooves, indicating that the Ahuna Mons construct is younger than this portion of the RLS. We are currently investigating the possibility that a subsurface fracture (part of the RLS) may have provided a conduit for ascending material to form Ahuna Mons. 4. Urvara and Yalode. In agreement with [8], we observe that the RLS are cross cut by grooves and secondary crater chains radial to Urvara and Yalode craters. In addition, in this work we observe that the floor of Yalode crater may contain partially buried/re-activated RLS, which we will further investigate with LAMO-based mapping. Thus, these cross-cutting relationships indicate that the RLS formed prior to Urvara and Yalode craters.  Discussion and future work:  The aforementioned cross-cutting relationships indicate that the RLS are older than Occator, Dantu, Urvara and Yalode craters, as well as Ahuna Mons, making them one of the oldest features on Ceres. In future work we will investigate possible mechanisms that could explain the formation of this widespread, relatively old set of fractures on Ceres.  References:  [1] McCord T. B. and Gaffey M. J. (1974) Science, 186, 352355. [2] Lebofsky L. et al. (1981) Icarus, 48, 453-459. [3] Küppers M. et al. (2014) Nature, 505, 525-527. [4] Castillo-Rogez J. C. and McCord T. B. (2010) Icarus, 205, 443-459. [5] McCord T. B. and Sotin C. (2005) J. Geophys. Res., 110, EO5009 1-14. [6] Nathues A. et al. (2015) Nature, 528, 237-240. [7] De Sanctis M. C. et al. (2015) Nature, 528, 241-243. [8] Buczkowski D. L. et al. (2015) AGU, Abstract #P44B-05. [9] Roatsch T. et al. (2015) Planetary and Space Science, in press. [10] Williams D. A. et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, this meeting. [11] Wyrick D. et al. (2004) Journal of Geophysical Research, 109, E06005. [12] Ruesch O. et al. (2015) AGU, Abstract #P31H-06.  Figure 1. Global geologic map of linear features on Ceres, overlain onto the HAMO-resolution (~140 m/pixel) Framing Camera basemap (mosaics made by DLR and T. Platz, MPS). Red lines are grooves, yellow lines are chains or pits/craters, and green lines are intra-crater grooves. 1618.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
