 WORLD SPACE WEEK IN VALENTINA TERESHKOVA CULTURAL AND EDUCATIONAL CENTRE. E. N. Tikhomirova, Valentina Tereshkova Cultural and educational centre, Tchcaikovskogo st., 3, Yaroslavl, Russia, 150000; en_tihomirova@mail.ru.   Introduction:  Worldwide annually we celebrate day of the beginning of research of a space as part of the World space week which proceeds from October the 4th to October the 10th. During these days people, whose professions are connected with astronomy or cosmonautics hold the most interesting meetings, events for school students and students and urge to pay attention to studying of a space [1],[2]. From August the 1st to October the 7th, 2015 the II Regional children's creative competition of photos "Sky and Earth" was held in Valentina Tereshkova Cultural and educational centre. It was devoted to the first photographing of a surface of Venus executed 22.10.1975 by Russian automatic interplanetary station "Venus-9". The competion was one of the World space week events in Valentina Tereshkova Cultural and educational centre. The purpose of the competition was drawing attention and deepening of interest of children and adults to astronomy and cosmonautics, and also development of creative capabilities of children.  The tasks were: - ensuring mass participation in the competition and identification of exceptional children. - expansion of an outlook and general erudition of participants of the competion. - development in children of the imagination and creativity.  - education of esthetic taste. The pupils of the city of Yaroslavl and the Yaroslavl region were invited to participate in the competion. The age of participants was from 7 till 17 years old.Thus two age categories were allocated: from 7 to 11 years old and from 12 to 17 years old. A primary subject of the competition was the terrestrial landscape with celestial bodies and the phenomena. The following nominations were represented: 1) The earth and the Moon (Moon phases, lunar eclipses, the non-stationary phenomena on the Moon, planets near the Moon), "parade" of planets; 2) Earth and Sun (rising, sunset, eclipses); 3) Earth and stars (stellar sky, constellations, asterisms); 4) Terrestrial landscape: rainbow, thunder-storm, clouds and other atmospheric phenomena (luminous clouds, meteors, fall of meteorites, auroras). On the 07th of October, 2015  the ceremony of summing up and rewarding of winners of the II Regional children's creative competitions of photos "Sky and Earth" took place. More than 200 participants and more than 70 creative mentors took part in the competition. The participants from 34 educational institutions of the city of Yaroslavl and the Yaroslavl region, and also organizations of additional education provided more than 600 photoworks which imprinted landscapes with celestial bodies and the phenomena in different corners of Earth on court of Jury of the competition. All the participants and their creative mentors received souvenirs and exclusive Certificates of the participant. Winners of the competition were marked especially out by valuable prizes. Conclusion:  As a result of competition many educational problems can be solved, such as a professional orientation of teenagers and expansion of their outlook, activization of interest of school students in studying of history of development and space exploration and increase of level of knowledge in the field of technical, natural and the humanities, aimed at peaceful research and development of a space, education of patriotism through heroics of a profession of cosmonauts, training of school students in bases of research work and forming of the competitive personality. References:  [1] Tikhomirova E. N. and Gorodenskaya лю. N. (2015) LPS XXXXVI, Abstract # 1390. [2] Tikhomirova лЋ.N. Astrospace education and awareness system in Valentina Tereshkova Cultural and educational centre (2015) Yaroslavl: Publishing house of YSPU, p. 205-211. 