1653.PDF
THE SSERVI-IMPACT DUST ACCELERATOR FACILITY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO  M. Horányi1, D. James1, S. Kempf1, T. Munsat1, Z. Sternovsky1 (1 SSERVI/IMPACT, 3400 Marine Street, Boulder, CO 80303; horanyi@colorado.edu).   Introduction A hypervelocity dust accelerator for studying micrometeorite impacts has been constructed at the University of Colorado, initially (2009-2013) funded as part of the NASA Lunar Science Institute's (NLSI) Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmospheric Studies (CCLDAS).  Since 2014, the facility continues to receive funding from the NASA Solar System Exploration Research Virtual Institute's (SSERVI) Institute form Modeling Plasmas, Atmospheres, and Cosmic DusT (IMPACT). The accelerator was completed in 2011, and consists of a 3 MV Pelletron generator (Figure 1.) with a dust source, image charge pickup detectors, and interchangeable target chambers. It has been used for a large number of science experiments [2-4], as well as for the development, testing, and calibration of flight hardware [5].     Figure 1. The SSERVI/IMPACT dust accelerator. The Pelletron on the left side creates the 3 MV potential difference through a chain induction system that works similarly to a Van de Graaf machine. The dust particles start off in a source inside the Pelletron, where they are charged and sent into the main acceleration tube. The accelerated particles are sent through detectors that determine their velocity and mass in real time. A logic circuit uses this information to decide whether or not the particle is accepted and sends a signal to the deflector plates, which divert unwanted particles out of the beam path.   Accelerator Performance The accelerator is a source of hypervelocity dust particles with radii in the range of 10 nm < a < 5 µm (Fe), and speed range in excess of 100 km/s (Figure 2).  We have successfully accelerated particles with a variety of composition, including Fe,Ag, olivine, and latex.    Figure 2. The performance of the IMPACT dust accelerator, showing the mass and speed distribution of the accelerated Fe particles.   Initial Experiments included cratering studies of thin plastic films [2], the generation of electric antenna signals [3], and the production of plasma and neutral gas [4] in dust impacts, for example. Cratering Experiments Thin plastic films are used as spacecraft blankets as well as aperture shields of particle detectors.  In addition, Permanently polarized Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) films have been used as dust detectors on a number of space missions. The scaling laws (Figure 3) connecting the size and the speed of a projectile to the depth and diameter of the crater they excavate remains a poorly understood but important issue for both spacecraft safety engineering, as well basic science investigations.   the crater after the ﬁnal cleaning cut. The boundary of the crater isnearly invisible due to the fact that the PVDF material is nonconducting and results in low contrast. After depositing a thin layerof platinum seen in Fig. 3e, the boundary becomes clear and thedepth proﬁle can be measured. Fig. 3f shows the same crater imagedfrom directly above proving that the boundary is very sharp. Lookingat Fig. 3, parts a and c, a melt layer is clearly missing between the twoimages. This was an unintentional side effect when focusing the ionbeam for cross-sectioning. In the future, it may therefore be moreappropriate to deposit a thicker platinum layer to preserve thecrater's shape and enhance contrast in the boundary after crosssectioning. Finally, by measuring the boundary between the platinumand PVDF and correcting for the tilted viewing angle, a depth proﬁlecan be measured with high accuracy.Fig. 2. Sample images of craters found in PVDF. Diameters of craters were determined by manually selecting 10 points on the rim of the crater and then performing a leastsquares ﬁt of those points to an ellipse. The diameter is taken to be the average of the major and minor diameters. The depth was determined by 3D stereophotogrammetry.Fig. 3. (a) Initial crater imaged at 01. (b) Same crater imaged at 521. (c) Crater imaged after initial stair pattern cut. (d) A close up of the cross sectioned crater. (e) Same craterafter a thin layer of platinum is deposited. (f) A view of the cross sectioned crater from directly above.A. Shu et al. / Planetary and Space Science ∎ (∎∎∎∎) ∎∎∎-∎∎∎ 3Please cite this article as: Shu, A., et al., Cratering studies in Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) thin ﬁlms. Planetary and Space Science(2013), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2013.05.001i Figure 3. Sample images of craters found in PVDF [2].    1653.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
The Development of Ice and Gas Targets  We have recently completed two major target upgrades: a cryogenic ice target and a high-pressure gas target. Cryogenic targets enable the studies of the effects of dust bombardment on ices throughout the solar system, including the permanently shadowed regions of the Moon, or the icy surfaces of outer solar system objects.  The gas targets chamber is used to understand the ablation of meteoroids in planetary atmospheres, or in the case of the Earth, to improve our ability to analyze and interpret the data from ground-based meteorradars.  Ice Impact Experiments The ice target consists of a LN2 cryogenic system connected to both a water-ice deposition system as well as a movable freezer/holder for a premixed liquid cartridge. Planned experiments include the bombardment of a variety of frozen targets and simulated ice/regolith mixtures, and the assessment of all impact products (solid ejecta, gas, plasma) as well as spectroscopy of both the impact-produced light flashes and the reflected spectra (UV, visible, IR). Figure 4 shows example initial measurements of cluster size distributions generated in dust impacts of pure water ice.      Figure 4.  Initial results of the distribution of water clusters using a Time-of-Flight (TOF) mass spectrometer from Fe particle impacts with speed of 6 (top) and 20 (bottom) km/s into pure water ice.       Gas Target Experiments The gas target consists of a differentially pumped chamber kept at moderate background pressures, such that high-velocity (≥10 km/s) micrometeoroids are completely ablated within 10's of cm (i.e. within the measurement chamber). The chamber is configured with segmented electrodes to perform a spatially resolved measurement of charge production during ablation (Figure 5), and localized lightcollection optics enable an assessment of the light production (luminous efficiency).      Figure 5. A cutaway diagram of the gas target chamber containing the ionization plates and the impact detector (top).  The charge collected in each channel as function of time (bottom left), and the integrated total charges (bottom right)[6].   The talk will summarize our current capabilities and recent experimental results, and extend an invitation to the planetary and space science communities. New experimental groups are continually solicited to work with us on experiments addressing the effects of debris/meteoroid impacts on spacecraft and instrumentation, the atmosphere of the Earth and other planets, as well as surface effect on airless bodies in the solar system. The facility also provides a unique opportunity to cross-calibrate remote sensing and in-situ instruments for future space missions.   References:  [1] Shu et al., (2012) Rev. Sci. Instr., 83, 075108; [2] Shu et al., (2013) PSS 89, 29-35; [3] Collette et al., (2014) Icarus 227, 89-93;  [4] Colette et al., (2015), JGR 120, 5298-5305;  [5] Horanyi et al., (2014) Space. Sci. Rev. 185, 93-113; [6] Thomas et al., (2016) GRL, submitted.  1653.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
