1657.PDF
MAGNETIC FORCES ON SMALL BODIES CAN BE CHARACTERIZED BY MAGNETIC SCANS.  G. Kletetschka1, 2, L. Nabelek1, and J. Hruba,1 1Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Science, Albertov 6, Prague, Czech Republic, Kletetschka@gmail.com, 2Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Geology v.v.i., Prague, Czech Republic.   Introduction:  Magnetic properties of small bodies such as meteorites are of growing interest to the concept of mining asteroids, as magnetism should become useful when exploring the asteroid belt [1,2].  In order to understand magnetic properties of  asteroid material and how to use this feature for moving objects on the asteroid surface by magnetic force it requires in situ knowledge of magnetic coercivity of remanence (CR) for magnetic minerals contained within an asteroid. There are asteroids like Eros without any magnetic remanent signature [3,4] while other asteroids like Vesta, may contain some primordial level of magnetization [5]. Here we focus on establishing the level of CR in situ in Chelyabinsk meteorite, which will provide a key parameter for a future design of electromagnetic crane to transport fragments of asteroid over the mining surface [6,7]. Magnetic images of Chelyabinsk meteorite's (fragment removed from Chebarkul lake) thin sections have been unraveled by a magnetic scanning system from Youngwood Science and Engineering (YSE). Anomalies were produced repeatedly, each time after an application of magnetic field pulse of varying amplitude and constant, normal or reversed, direction. This process resulted in both magnetizing and demagnetizing of the meteorite thin section, while keeping the magnetization vector in the plane of the thin section. Analysis of the magnetic data allows determination of CR for the magnetic sources in situ. CR was estimated by two methods. First method measured varying dipole magnetic field strengths? produced by each anomaly in the direction of magnetic pulses. Second method measured deflections of the dipole direction from the direction of magnetic pulses. CR of magnetic sources in Chelyabinsk meteorite ranges between 4 and 7 mT. These magnetic sources enter their saturation states when applying 40 mT external magnetic field pulse. Scanning Magnetic Microscopy:  The dominant technique for imaging magnetization distributions in geological samples is scanning magnetic microscopy (SMM). SMM techniques have been considerably developed in the last few years. The biggest advantage is a small low-cost but high-performance magnetic sensor. We used a magnetic sensor assembled by Youngwood Science and Engineering (YSE). The sensor consists of a stationary Hall probe and 2D motorized stage, whose movement is controlled MagScan software (also developed by YSE). The? Hall probe senses the magnetic component perpendicular to the scanning surface (e.g. geological thin section) from a distance of 0.3 mm. The output is a 2D image of magnetic anomaly map that shows the magnetic field values obtained above the sample surface. The magnetic maps are composed of individual measurement points. Step between these points was set to 80 microns. At every point the sensor measured 4 times and took an average, giving the resulting value. Coercivity of remanence spectra:  The sample was scanned after each of the stepwise magnetic acquisition by ASC pulse magnetizer model IM -10-30 [8]. Magnetizing was performed in plane with respect to the plane of meteorite thin section. The sample was magnetized first with a predetermined direction with the 1T magnetic field and was then gradually remagnetized in opposing direction to reach the saturated magnetization in opposing direction (sample went through demagnetization, while we observed rotation of the dipole by 180 °) in increments of 1 mT. It reached saturation when applying -40 mT of ambient field intensity. The same procedure was applied in the reversed direction. For the magnetic field analysis we used a semi-automatic Excel program. The magnetic scan of the thin section identified 6 major magnetic anomalies. Excel program was able to keep track of the coordinate of the center of magnetic anomaly (transect between positive and negative magnetic readings, while we observed a rotation of the magnetic dipoles in the field detected above the thin section. The data set allowed determination of coercivity of remanence for the individual anomalies caused usually by discrete metal grains.  In the next step, for each of the anomalies, 1 - 6, we localized each maximum and minimum of the magnetic dipoles, and they were fitted with a straight line. Coordinates of the points that determine the maximum and minimum are monitored during the remagnetization in the opposing direction. This procedure was performed for each of the scans and the resulting data created the base for determination of the coercivity of remanence for each of the anomaly source. Values for rotational remanence were plotted based on the dipole angle deflection from the direction of the original saturated state. 1657.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Conclusions:  1. We introduced magnetic scanning on the Chelyabinsk meteorite and obtained robust magnetic signatures caused by taenite and kamacite magnetic minerals. 2. We produced more than 80 magnetic scans that created a magnetic characterization database for all grains that produce magnetic anomalies. We showed that such data set can be used to estimate independent values of coercivity of remanence for each of the studied magnetic anomalies (A1, .. A6). 3. Magnetic scan analysis allowed observation of the rotation of the magnetic dipole directions at the moment of magnetic reversal. Observation of this new parameter allows more simple determination of the coercivity of remanence because the angle remains stationary and reverses quickly within 2-4 mT. 4. Magnetic anomalies within Chelyabinsk meteorite are all associated with the thin veins. 5. Sources of magnetic anomalies generated in microscale over the thin section of the meteorite are taenite with composition of Nickel (27-40 %), Cobalt (0.65-1.48 %) and Iron (59-70%), and kamacite with composition of Nickel (4-6%), Cobalt (2.07-3.11%) and Iron (89-91%), 6. Magnetic grains of taenite and kamacite (0.1-1.0 mm in diameter) are associated with specific magnetic coercivity of remanence for 6 significant magnetic anomalies and ranges from 3.6 to 7.4 mT that indicates coercivity values of 1 mT (coercivity of remanence is 4-6 fold of coercivity for MD material).  References: [1] Kletetschka G. et al., (2007) LPS XXXVIII, abstract 1093. [2] Kohout T. et al. (2008) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 43, 6, 1009-1020. [3] Acuna M. H. et al. (2002) Icarus, 155, 1, 220-228. [4] Wasilewski P. (2002) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 37, 7, 937-950. [5] Fu R. R. and Weiss B. P.  (2012) Geophysical Research-Planets, v. 117. E02003. [6] Kargel J. S.  (1994) Journal of Geophysical Research-Planets, v. 99, no. E10, p. 21129-21141. [7] Oleary B. (1977) Science, v. 197, no. 4301, p. 363-366. [8] Nabelek L. et al., (2015) Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 50(6), 1112-1121 Acknowledgments:  We thank Martin Racek for helping  with running the microprobe analysis. We also thank Darja Kawasumiova, Andrei Orlov, Sergei Zacharov, and Jan Vyhnanek for helping with collecting the Chelyabinsk meteorite samples. Additional help was provided by Petr Schnabl, Matthew Markley, Kamila Malkova, Marian Takac, a Radana Kavkova. The project was supported by MEYS grant LK21303, and grant RVO 67985831. 1657.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
