1687.PDF
HOW CAN CERES GENERATE ENERGETIC ELECTRONS? CONFIRMING THE PRESENCE OF A TEMPORARY BOW SHOCK.  M. N. Villarreal1, C. T. Russell1, T. H. Prettyman2, N. Yamashita2, Y. D. Jia1, P. J. Chi1, S. P. Joy1. 1University of California Los Angeles, Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, 603 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA. 2Planetary Science Institute, 1700 East Fort Lowell Suite 106, Tucson, AZ 85719-2395 USA.  Introduction:  While Dawn was at Vesta, the body behaved as one would expect for a body with neither an atmosphere nor a strong magnetic field. Solar events passed as expected without any additional effects from the planet. However, during Dawn’s Survey orbit around Ceres in June 2015, located about 10 Ceres radii (or 4,400 km altitude) away from the body, a solar energetic particle (SEP) event was recorded by Dawn’s GRaND (Gamma Ray and Neutron Detector) [1]. In contrast to similar events observed at Vesta, this particular occurrence was accompanied by a pattern of spikes in the counts recorded by GRaND’s +Z Phoswich scintillator superimposed on the SEP event. These spikes were distinct enhancements lasting on the order of minutes to an hour and reoccurred twice after the SEP event had ceased (Figure 1).   Day of June 201514 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30+Z Phoswich Counts×10 41.522.533.54Electron BurstsTimeseriesElectron Bursts Figure 1. Time series of the +Z phoswich scintillator counts. Electron bursts higlighted by dots. The bursts appear alongside an SEP event and reoccur on two consercutive orbits.  The spike pattern was absent from the measurements from the Bismuth Germanate (BGO) scintillator. This suggests the radiation responsible for the bursts in the exterior phoswich scintillator and any of their byproducts were fully absorbed by materials surrounding the BGO. The source particles causing the enhancements were likely swift electrons that penetrated directly into the phoswich or associated bremsstrahlung produced in surrounding materials. The phoswich detection threshold for electrons is 20 keV and energy deposition during spike events cut off at about 100 keV, providing an upper bound for the energy of impinging electrons if the phoswich is responding to bremsstrahlung. Figure 2a shows the location of each burst relative to the surface in planetary coordinates, with crater Kait defining zero longitude [2]. Other than the fact that all the bursts occurred in the southern hemisphere, there appears to be no relation with the occurrence of the electron bursts with any geographical feature. However, in Ceres Solar Orbital (CSO) coordinates, the locations of the electron bursts are well ordered (Figure 2b).  The spikes in electrons begin to appear when the spacecraft crosses into the southern hemisphere on the dayside, with the largest enhancements occurring at similar latitudes over 3 consecutive orbits.    Figure 2. A) Electron burst locations in planetary coordinates.  There is no correlation of the locations of the bursts with geographical features. B) Electron burst locations in CSO coordinates. The bursts reoccur at similar locations in the southern hemisphere when the spacecraft is on the dayside of the planet. Symbol size reflects the magnitude of each spike.  Electron Acceleration by Ceres:   Typical electron energies from the solar wind are on the order of 10 eV [3], while the electrons detected by GRaND are on the order of tens of keV. Therefore, a mechanism is required to accelerate these electrons to such high energies in the Ceres environment. Solar events alone are 1687.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
not able to explain the electron bursts as they would not exhibit any location dependence. Furthermore, the +Z phoswich scintillator that observed the bursts was pointed antisunward and toward the body center at the time of the detections, indicating the energetic electrons came from the Ceres direction. It is possible the solar event triggered the energetic electron production at Ceres. Fast-Fermi acceleration at planetary bow shocks is known to produce backstreaming electrons with energies reaching tens of keV [4]. Upstream electrons with high pitch angles are not able to pass through the bow shock due to the increase in magnetic field strength and the inability to conserve their magnetic moment [5,6]. These electrons get reflected and accelerated along magnetic field lines tangent to the bow shock, creating a narrow beam known as the electron foreshock. When a spacecraft passes through an electron foreshock, it records this event as bursts. This mechanism is able to explain the high energies of the electrons, the localized nature of the detections, and the distance from the body that they appear. We postulate that the electron bursts recorded by the +Z phoswich scintillator were associated with the formation of a temporary bow shock generated by either a transient atmosphere or an electrically conducting Ceres interior.   Method:  Dawn lacks the instrumentation traditionally used to confirm an electron foreshock. Without a magnetometer, we cannot measure the direction of the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) at the time of the observations. To get around this, we invoke a model that places the bow shock at a distance of 1.5 RC at the subsolar point. This is the size of a shock that would be produced by a gas emission rate of 3x1026 H2O molecules/s, similar to estimates by Kuppers et al. using the Herschel Telescope [7]. With this model, we can find the IMF directions necessary for an electron to travel from a hypothetical bow shock to the location of the spacecraft. We can also calculate the distance from the point of tangency to the spacecraft and use fastFermi theory to estimate the energies and fluxes that we would be expect from this geometry.  Since the assumptions used to derive fast-Fermi theory are generally oversimplified, it would also be beneficial to use in-situ measurements to aid our study. The electron foreshock at Earth has been well studied and we can use various spacecraft to calculate the flux and energies of the reflected electrons with increasing distance from the point of tangency. Since the underlying physics for the Earth and Ceres cases will be the same, we can scale down the Earth results to the Ceres scale. Based on the Earth case, we can use the observations by GRaND to check if the flux and energies of the electrons are consistent with what we would expect at the calculated travel distances to Dawn from our model.  The combined results of the Earth and Ceres model cases will allow us to determine if the acceleration of electrons at Earth and Ceres are consistent with the same physical mechanism. Ceres is not believed to be a magnetized body, so the genesis of the bow shock would have significant implications for its surface and/or interior processes. A transient atmosphere or a conducting layer are the best candidates to act as an obstacle to the solar wind.  Kuppers et al. [7] reported intermittent observations of water molecules at the surface of Ceres by the Herschel Space Observatory. Models [8] suggest that a transient atmosphere on Ceres could last approximately ten days, which is the same timescale over which the electron bursts occur. Alternatively, if the planet has an electrically conducting layer, a bow shock can be generated as the layer prevents the penetration of the magnetized plasma. An enhancement in the IMF due to a solar event could trigger such a response. It is suggested that there is a partially molten or even perhaps liquid layer tens of kilometers beneath the surface rich in salt [9], which could act as a conductive layer. While this work alone cannot differentiate between an atmospheric or interior origin, the ability to confirm the presence of a bow shock lays the groundwork and provides constraints for future missions and studies.  References:  [1] Prettyman, T.H. et al., Dawn’s gamma ray and neutron detector, Space Sci. Rev. 163, 371-459 (2011). [2] Russell, C.T. et al., Dawn Arrives at Ceres: Exploration of a Volatile-Rich planet, submitted to Science (2016). [3] Feldman, W. C. et al., Solar Wind Electrons, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 80, No. 31, 4181-4196 (1975). [4] Anderson, K. A. et al., Thin sheets of energetic electrons upstream from the Earth’s bow shock, Geophysical Research Letters, Vol 6, No. 5, 401-404 (1979). [5] Wu, C. S., A Fast Fermi Process: Energetic Electrons Accelerated by a Nearly Perpendicular Bow Shock, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 89, NO A10, 8857-886 (1984). [6] M.M. Leroy and A. Mangeney, A theory of energization of solar-wind electrons by the Earth’s bow shock. Annales Geophys. 2, 449-456 (1984). [7] Kuppers, M.  et al., Localized Sources of Water Vapor on the Dwarf Planet Ceres, Nature 505, 525-527 (2014).  [8]  M. Formisano, M.C. DeSanctis, G. Magni, C. Federico, M.T. Capria, Ceres water regime: Surface temperature, water sublimation and transient exo(atmo)sphere. MNRAS 455, 1892-1904 (2016). [9] Castillo-Rogez, J. et al., Where is Ceres’ Ice Shell?, Lunar and Planetary Science Conference abstract (2016).  1687.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
