1701.PDF
AMINIATURE ELECTRON PROBE FOR IN SITU ELEMENTAL MICROANALYSIS. Lucy F. Lim1, AdrianE. Southard1,2, Stephanie A. Getty1, Larry A. Hess1, John G. Hagopian1,3, 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center(lucy.f.lim@nasa.gov) 2USRA 3Sigma Space CorpThe Mini-EPMA will combine efficient microscalecompositional mapping with a new light-element(C/N/O) capability to significantly advance our capability for remote in situ determination of the elemental composition of planetary, asteroidal, and cometary material.Composition provides key evidence about the processesby which rocks, soils, and ices were formed and altered(for example, accretion, differentiation, and hydrothermal alteration) thus recording past stages in solar systemevolution. The capability for rapid basic elemental analysis will also contribute to the location of resources tosupport exploration. The instrument prototype discussedhere would be a promising addition to the scientific payload of a future landed lunar, asteroid or comet mission.The high spatial resolution achievable with a focusedelectron beam will permit sub-millimeter scale compositional mapping in a flight instrument. Modeling withSIMION [1] indicates that spot sizes under 100 µm areachievable in a flight instrument with microscale fieldemitters in an array, with focusing achieved by a compact electrostatic lens stack.In the mini-electron probe (“EPMA”) flight concept(Fig. 1), electrons are drawn out of an addressableelement carbon nanotube field emitter array [2, 3] by thecathode/grid extraction voltage, then accelerated by thelens stack (Fig. 2) into the planetary/asteroidal/cometarysurface, exciting X-ray line emission characteristic ofthe elemental composition of the surface. The X-raysare then measured by a silicon drift detector similar tothose used in laboratory energy-dispersive spectroscopy(EDS) and analyzed using standard EPMA techniques togive the surface composition of the region illuminated sequentially by each electron-beam spot (100 µm). In thisway, a grid of e-beam spots activated in sequence willnon-destructively produce a fine-scale map of elementalcomposition. Microfabrication techniques are used to define the growth regions for the CNT emitters, as well asthe grid electrode required to individually address eachelement in the array.Science goals and sensitivity: Laboratory electron microprobe analyses of mineral grains achieve precisions of1% or less for the weight percentages of major-elementoxides as well as measurements of minor-element oxides<0.5% by weight. Typical beam currents are u 10–100nA, accelerating voltages 15–20 kV, cm-scale workingdistances, and exposure times u 20–30 s. These levelsof current and voltage will be readily achievable with theminiature electron gun albeit at a larger spot sizeFigure 1: The electron gun will illuminate 100 µm spots on the natural surface, thus enabling in situ mapping of elementalcomposition on the scale of the beam diameter. The prototype will employ a 10x10 array of carbon nanotube “forest” emitters andcover a 3.1x3.1 mm field.1701.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
(u100 µm instead of <1 µm). We will also evaluate thebenefit to the light-element analyses of collecting a second spectral map at a lower beam voltage (3–5 kV) wherethe C/N/O cross-sections are higher.Preliminary mechanical concept for the mini-EPMAflight instrument: A mechanical model produced bythe GSFC Instrument Design Laboratory has a total instrument mass of 3.3–3.6 kg depending on whether themain electronics (including high-voltage power supply)are mounted on a deployment arm with the rest of themini-EPMA instrument or on the main lander body (fora two-meter notional arm length). A rotating door protects the sensors from dust and particle intrusion duringdeployment and can also carry a calibration target. Themodel includes two electron guns and two X-ray detectors for reliability. Peak power is estimated at 12.7 W;average power at 5.7 W.Figure 2: Prototype lens stack for EPMA electron gunYear 1–2 Work: Preliminary design of the lens stackand cathode/grid package have been completed. Cathode/grid fabrication is in progress, with photomask layout having been completed. In parallel, CNT growth withtwo catalyst types is in testing in order to optimize forestemission properties. Prototype patterned 10x10 cathodeshave been grown with both catalysts (Fig. 3).Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge thesupport of the NASA PICASSO program for this work.C. Kotecki (GSFC) and J. Gaskin (NASA/MSFC) alsocontributed as co-authors on the PICASSO proposal.This work depends on the ongoing efforts of N. Costen,A. Ewin, G. Hidrobo, C. Johnson, G. Manos, G. Ramu,and E. Young at GSFC.References[1] David A Dahl. SIMION for the personal computer inreflection. International Journal of Mass Spectrometry,Figure 3: SEM micrographs of 10x10-element carbon nanotube forest cathode prototypes. Top and middle: Cathodegrown with “Catalyst B”. Bottom: Single forest of “Catalyst A”cathode, grown to a lower height than “Catalyst B”. Each forestserves as a field emitter when addressed, providing electrons tothe e-gun in order to stimulate characteristic X-ray emissionfrom the target material.200(1-3):3–25, Dec 2000. doi: 10.1016/S1387-3806(00)00305-5.[2] S. A. Getty, T. T. King, R. A. Bis, H. H. Jones, F. Herrero,B. A. Lynch, P. Roman, and P. Mahaffy. Performance ofa carbon nanotube field emission electron gun. Society ofPhoto-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, April 2007. doi: 10.1117/12.720995.[3] S. A. Getty, R. A. Bis, S. Snyder, E. Gehrels, K. Ramirez,T. T. King, P. A. Roman, and P. R. Mahaffy. Effect of nitrogen gas on the lifetime of carbon nanotube field emittersfor electron-impact ionization mass spectrometry. Societyof Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, May 2008. doi: 10.1117/12.776914.1701.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
