1727.PDF
Geomorphological Mapping on the Southern Hemisphere of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.  Jui-Chi Lee1, Matteo Massironi2, Lorenza Giacomini2 , Wing-Huen Ip3,4,5 , M. R. El-Maarry6, Maurizio Pajola7 and the OSIRIS team 1Department of Earth Sciences, National Central University, Chung-Li 32054, Taiwan (vickielee333@gmail.com), 2Department of Geoscience, University of Padova, Italy, 3Institute of Astronomy, National Central University, Chung-Li 32054, Taiwan, 4Institute of Space Science, National Central University, Chung-Li 32054, Taiwan,  5Space Science Institute, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, 6Physikalisches Institut, University of Bern, Switzerland, 7Center of Studies and Activities for Space, CISAS, ‘G. Colombo’, University of Padova, Padova, Italy  Introduction:  Since its rendezvous with comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko on the sixth of August, 2014, the Rosetta spacecraft has carried out close-up observations of the nucleus and coma of this Jupiter family comet. The OSIRIS, the Scientific Imaging Camera System onboard the Rosetta spacecraft [1], which consists of a narrow-angle and wide-angle camera (NAC and WAC), has made detailed investigations of the physical properties and surface morphology of the comet [2,3]. From May 2015, i.e. the comet's equinox, the southern hemisphere of the comet became visible, and the scale was high enough to perform a detailed analysis of the surface. In this work, we provide the first geomorphological maps of the southern hemisphere with linear features and geological units identified.  Methodology and Dataset:  We use the images taken by the narrow-angle camera of OSIRIS imaging system on May 2, 2015 to prepare the geomorphological mapping of the southern hemisphere of 67P/C-G when the subsolar latitude was at 3 degrees north (Figure 1, 2). The distance to the comet center was about 124 km, and the scale was 2.3 meter/pixel. The same image with the regional boundaries is shown in Figure 1 [4]. While performing the geomorphological mapping, we identify the surface textures and classify them into different geological units as in [5]. In particular, we have distinguished rocky-like outcrops and noncohesive deposits. Among the latter, the mass wasting deposits [5,6], most of them due to the concurrent processes of sublimation and gravitational collapses [7], are classified into three types: (1) talus deposits (fine deposits laying on slope underneath steep scarps) ; (2) gravitational accumulation deposits (badly sorted deposits at the scarps bases), and (3) diamicton deposits (highly heterogeneous deposits of uncertain origin). We divided the homogeneous fine deposits made up of dust particles which might be the result of the airfall [2,8], into two types: (1) fine material deposits, where the stratified substratum is covered by a thin layer of dust, and (2) smooth material deposits, containing a thick layer of dust. We also identified several linear features which are : (1) cuestas and terrace margins; (2) strata heads on steep slopes; (3) fractures; (4) niches; (5) pit margins, and (6) scarps. Most of these terms are self explanatory, the more peculiar features being the “Pit margins”. They are semi-circular or circular scarps where erosion was caused by the activity from the pit walls [9]. The deposits inside the pits are thus often composed of fine material eroded from their walls. Niches appear to be remnants of such circular morphologies. These, together with the scarps, which are steep walls cutting over strata, are likely caused by collapsing  and retreat events. Geomorphological Maps: `    1. Wosret region The Wosret region located on the head in the southern hemisphere is flat. The general geomorphology of this region is characterized by rocky layered terrain, with dust covers within its center and scattered boulders. The boulders and pits are rare. We observe strata going throughout this region. The part of Wosret near the neck in Fig. 2 is in the shadow. By observing this region from another view, we can find that the strata is banded on the head of the comet. This analysis supports the onion-like internal structure of the comet presented in [10]. 2. Anhur and Geb The Geb region is dominated by the rocky layered terrain. The strata and the rocky terrain in the Geb region extended to the Anhur region which is a bouldered rich region with different kinds of deposits possibly coming from the adjacent cliffs. There are some smooth material deposits near the neck between these two regions. However, the strata heads can be still visible underneath such smooth material. We also observe three bright spots on the talus deposits on Anhur region in April, 2015 but they disappeared in June, 2015. They were probably composed of ice-rich materials. 3. Khonsu region This region provides a possible glimpse into the inner structure of the nucleus. We have observed many kinds of special features, including bright materials, pancake structures outcropping right in the center of the region, and a layered sharp scarp 100 meters high. From the linear feature and geological unit identification, we can simply divide this region into two parts. The southern part is made up of bright outcropping 1727.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
materials (“uncertain” in Figure 3) with a more chaotic and fractured sector underneath. The strata in blue lines and yellow lines could be the same shells of the comet. Conclusion: Previous work shows that the fine particle deposits are the most extensive geomorphological unit in the northern hemisphere [6]. On the contrary, southern hemisphere is dominated by rocky-like, almost dust-free stratified terrain. We can reconstruct the layering structures of the nucleus by observing strata heads and terrace and cuestas margins [9]. The strata attitudes in the southern hemisphere appear to confirm the two independent onion-like shells of the lobes, although part of the Khonsu region seems to be characterized by a more chaotic structure. The southern hemisphere of the nucleus surface reveals quite different morphologies from the northern hemisphere. This could be linked to the different insolation condition between northern and southern hemisphere. As a result, surface geological processes could operate with a diverse intensity on the different sides of the comet nucleus.        Reference: [1] Keller, H.U. et al.(2007) Space Sci. Rev., 128, 433 [2] Thomas, N. et al. (2015) Science, 347(6220), aaa0440 [3] Sierks, H. et al. (2015) Science, 347(6220), aaa1044 [4] http://www.esa.int/spaceinimages/Images/ 2015/08/Comet_southern_hemisphere  [5] La Forgia, F. et al. (2015). A&A, 583, A41 [6] Auger, , A-T. et al. (2015). A&A, 583, A35 [7] Pajola, M. et al. (2015). A&A, 583, A37 [8] Thomas, N. et al. (2015). A&A, 583, A17 [9] Vincent, J-B. et al. (2015) A&A, in press [10] Massironi, M. et al. (2015) Nature, 526(7573), 402-405  Figure 2. The geomorphological map on Wosret, Anhur and Geb region. The regional boundaries are shown in Figure 1a. Figure 3. The geomorphological map on Khonsu region. The regional boundaries are shown in Figure 1b. Figure 1. The images we use in this study with regional boundaries. Copyright ©  ESA/Rosetta/MPS for OSIRIS Team MPS/UPD/LAM/IAA/SSO/INTA/UPM/ DASP/IDA  1727.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
