1728.PDF
DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW PLUTO SURFACE SIMULATION CHAMBER.  Z. McMahon, C. Ahrens, and V. Chevrier, University of Arkansas, Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Science, Fayetteville, AR 72701 (zmmcmaho@email.uark.edu), University of Arkansas, Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Science, Fayetteville, AR 72701 (ca006@email.uark.edu),  University of Arkansas, Arkansas Center for Space and Planetary Science, Fayetteville, AR 72701 (vchevrie@uark.edu)    Introduction:  Within the Keck Laboratory at the University of Arkansas, we are developing a chamber for the simulation of the conditions on Pluto.  Using this chamber, we expect to accurately and stably recreate the temperature, pressure, and atmosphere found on the surface of Pluto.  With the data incoming from New Horizons, this chamber could be used to recreate, under controlled conditions, what has been recorded by New Horizons.  In these simulations, we can deposit ices such as observered on Pluto by New Horizons, see Figure 1.   With such a chamber, we will run experiments to understand the nature of chemical interactions on Pluto’s surface, especially with the thin atmosphere.  These experiments, along with data from New Horizons, will further our understanding of Pluto and other icy bodies in the distant reaches of the solar system. Regarding our background with chambers at the University of Arkansas, we have been using cryogenic systems, the Andromeda Chamber for instance, for some time as well as related pressure and vacuum systems [3].  This will be the next step in our line of simulation chambers.  Conditions to reach. On the surface of Pluto, the pressure is approximately ten microbar [2].  The average temperature is approximately 50 K (-223 ˚C).  The atmospheric composition is dominated by Nitrogen (N2), Methane (CH4), and C2HX hydrocarbons[2].  We plan to simulate these conditions so that it will be possible to model slightly different conditions in varying seasons. We also plan on condensing ices of various compositions and studying their spectral properties, but also to test the formation of tholins / aerosols resulting from the UV interactions with the CH4 in the atmosphere [1] Specifications: Our pressure vessel is a stainless steel elongated cylinder with rounded ends. Not including the rounded ends (approximately 1-2 inches at the furthest point), the chamber measures 22 inches (55.88 cm) long by 17 ¾ inches (45.085 cm) in diameter.  It has twenty-two points of access that we can use for varying instruments and equipment, refer to Figure 2.  Twelve of these access ports are smaller CF275 type ports. These are distributed across the chamber with four on either end and the other four on the sides near the top.  Seven of the access ports are CF600 ports.  These are distributed with two on each side, two on the top, and one on the end opposite the door.  There is one CF800 which is located on the bottom.  On the CF800 we currently have an adapter to convert it to a CF275 in order to accommodate our pressure lines.  There is one CF1000 which is located on the door.  The door covers the entire 17 ¾ inch (45.085 cm) diameter opening and also holds four of the CF275 ports as well as the CF1000 access port. When all the parts are situated, we expect to not only be able to reach average Pluto conditions, but to also go below them. Parts: In order to control and maintain the simulated conditions of Pluto, we are using a myriad of Figure 2:  Drawing of Pluto Chamber showing access ports, cryocooler, and attachment point of Prisma Mass Spectrometer. Figure 1: Pluto Ralph surface imaging over the western side of Sputnik Planum. (A) Orthographic projection of the LORRI mosaic. (B) False-color Ralph image from three near-IR wavelengths (blue, 1.66 μm; green, 1.79 μm; red, 1.89 μm) selected to highlight methane ice absorption. Regions with greater CH4 absorption appear red; regions with weaker CH4 absorption appear blue-green. Regions with greater contrast between the 1.66-μm and 1.79-μm CH4 absorptions tend toward yellow shades. (C) LEISA (Linear Etalon Imaging Spectral Array) map of CO ice absorption in SP produced by subtracting the 1.58-μm image from the mean of the 1.57- and 1.59-μm images. Note the elevated CO abundance in the central region of SP indicated by the brighter pixels. [2]  1728.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
parts and componets.  The most relevant are described here. Temperature. In order to reach the extremely low temperatures of Pluto, we are planning to use a Janis Special CSS DE-204SL Cryogenic Cryocooler Closed Cycle Refrigerator System.  This cold head will be coupled with a HC-2 compressor unit built by APD Cryogenics.  See Figure 3 for placement.  This type of system is expected to reach 10 Kelvins at a minimum, with heat control we can reach and maintain our desired temperatures.   Pressure. To reach the ultra-high vacuum conditions of Pluto, we plan to drop the pressure in two stages.  The first stage will be achieved using an Alcatel Pascal series vacuum pump as our roughing pump.  Once we have reached a low enough pressure we will engage a turbomolecular pump as our second stage.  The turbomolecular pump we use is a Balzers TPU – 270. In order to monitor pressure accurately from atmospheric pressure down to ultra-high vacuum range, we will be using a series of pressure gauges.  First off, we use a Granville-Phillips Series 375 Convectron, that we will use from atmosphic pressure to where it begins to reduce in accuracy.  The next step in pressure is observed using a thermocouple gauge.  These gauges are accurate between 0.1 to 100 Pa.  The final step will be observed and measured by an ionization gauge.  These gauges range from 10-8 to 10-2 Pa. Atmosphere. To regulate and control the composition of the atmosphere, we plan to use a small mixing chamber external to the main vacuum chamber.  In this small chamber we can prepare mixtures before releasing them into the chamber.  From this mixing chamber, we will route a gas line into the chamber for study and to maintain the atmospheric composition. We will also be able to withdraw samples from the mixing chamber to run through a gas chromograph in order to exactly know what mixture is inside the chamber.   Calibration: In order to calibrate and monitor the accuracy of conditions in the chamber we will take various steps.  We intend to incorporate some redundancy in regards to checks on pressure, temperature, and atmosphere composition.  Having multiple gauges at differing locations in the chamber should accomplish this goal. Also, as a double check on the atmosphere composition as well as a leak checker, we have placed a Prisma 80 Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer QMS 200 on one of the ports on top of the chamber, see Figure 3 or Figure 4. Conclusion:   Upon completion, this chamber will be able to reach and maintain the conditions apparent on the surface of Pluto.  The University of Arkansas will be able to perform a myriad of experiments.  Examples of experirments expected to be performed in this chamber can be found in the LPSC abstract titled: ICY COMPOSITION MEASUREMENTS IN SIMULATED PLUTO CONDITIONS, by Caitlin Ahrens[4].  Hopefully, this chamber and experiments therein, can lead to a better understanding of processes found in the outer reaches of our solar system. References:    [1]Materese et al., Ice Chemistry on Outer Solar System Bodies: Electron Radiolysis of N2, CH4-, and CO-containg Ices, The Astrophysical Journal, 812:150, 2015 [2] Stern et al., The Pluto system: Initial results from its exploration by New Horizons, Science, 16, Vol. 350 no. 6258, 2015. [3] Wasiak, F.C., et al. A facility for simulating Titan’s environment. J. Adv. Space Res. (2012), http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.asr.2012.10.020 [4] Ahrens, Icy Composition Measurements in Simulated Pluto Conditions(abstract) Figure 3:  Drawing of Pluto Chamber showing interior, cryocooler, and the Prisma Mass Spectrometer. Figure 4:  Image of the current state of the Pluto Chamber  1728.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
