1759.PDF
GULLY AND AEOLIAN ACTIVITY WITHIN THE “TLEILAX” DUNE FIELD IN THE OLYMPIA UNDAE, MARS. A. Allen1 S. Diniega2, C. Hansen3 1Santa Barbara City College (gypsiferous@gmail.com), 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 3Planetary Science Institute.  Introduction:  Tleilax is an informal name given to the dune field that lies at 83.5N, 118.6E in the Martian North Polar Erg, or Olympia Undae (Fig. 1). The dune field is adjacent to the North Polar layered deposits, and active geomorphological processes in the form of avalanches from the polar layered deposits as well as gully features on the dunes have been observed (Fig. 2). There has been exceptional coverage of the dune field by HiRISE, which consistently focuses on the same area of the dune field, and allows for a dedicated and detailed study of the field’s activity.      Gullies are active erosional features exhibiting alcove-channel-apron or alcove-channel configuration. The control of these processes, whether aeolian generated [2] or instigated by polar processes [3], can be better understood by constraining the timing of formation. A preliminary measurement of sediment flux can be made through determination of erasure rate, and by observing margin changes of dunes with and without gullies, the role of gullies in dune migration and evolution can be better understood.       Preliminary observations have been made monitoring gully formation/degradation, assessing trends in gully orientation and population on a dune, analyzing gully size in relation to dune size, and estimates of sediment fluctuation.  By studying yearly changes to the field, we will be able to determine the consistency of the activity. The formation mechanism of gullies in the Olympia Undae is not well understood as most gullies form when no observations can be made by HiRISE, due to the darkness of polar winter. By measuring yearly sediment flux in the Tleilax field, it is possible to ascertain whether or not the dunes are actively migrating. The gully activity of the field is an indication that surficial sedimentation is occurring, though it is not known if all dunes are actively migrating, or if they are ancient features cemented in place. Methods:  To initially observe changes that occurred within one Martian year, two HiRISE images, taken by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, were selected which showed the dunes completely defrosted, were approximately one Mars year apart with a similar lighting conditions (i.e., of similar solar longitude/Ls; with Ls 0 indicating spring solstice for the Northern Hemisphere), were taken from similar emission angles, and had coverage of as much of the same area as possible. The first analysis focused on MY 30-31.  Using the programs JMars and HiView, changes between the images bounding the year could be determined. A study of the intermediate images would then reveal the formation timing, and degradation timing would be revealed in subsequent images. Gullies that were found to form within that year were then measured (length, width, and orientation) and categorized based on amount and assemblage on the dune. This field is one location studied within a larger project aimed at elucidating gully formation and dune evolution throughout Olympia Undae, as outlined by [4]. Current Results: The Tleilax field is host to complex barchan and barchanoid dunes, some with multiple slip faces, mainly oriented with the slip (downwind) face directed southeast or northwest (Fig. 1). Gullies were found to only form on the slip faces of the dunes, although not solely on the steepest portion of the slip face.  Gullies which formed on one dune with multiple slip faces could have different infill rates, and in one case, appeared at different times.  Figure One: HiRISE image ESP_037222_2635 of the Tleilax field, shows defrosted dunes composed of dark, basaltic sand. Upper portion of image show the North Polar Layered deposits.  1759.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Of the ~1000 dunes in the field, 50% exhibited gully activity between MY 30-31. The gullies of the first year of this study formed between Ls 165 of MY 30 and Ls 13 of MY 31. This large time period could not be constrained further, as it spans the period when the North Pole is too dark to image. Because the formation timing is ill-constrained, the formation mechanism of northern latitude gullies can not be determined beyond a seasonal control.  Only four dunes were found to have gullies that formed before the large image gap in autumn and winter; between Ls 153 and 165 of the late summer of Martian year 30. The period over which the dune face was restored and the gullies filled-in is between Ls 98-113 of Martian year 32, for all four dunes. A calculation of sand transportation rate from one such gully, which exhibited close to average dimensions for the field (assuming 1:100 ratio between gully width and gully depth, based on Earth analog studies[3]), yielded a preliminary estimate of 0.004 meters2 per sol. This is consistent with a calculation made for sediment flux within Nili Patera, of 0.006 m2/sol [5]. However, there are distinct examples of new gullies being visible beneath the frost (and thus suggesting formation in autumn, before the thick frost cover formed) as seen in Fig. 2. The dark flow features appear to be modifying already present gullies, which could be acting as an area of weakness in the frost due to their irregular relief. The gullies with these “dark spots” [6] above them, and dark flow features coming out of them became deeper and wider than gullies which did not experience this springtime activity. Of the dunes which had gullies that formed sometime between autumn and winter, approximately 40% exhibited either new gullies forming, or alteration to pre-existing gullies between Ls 20-40. This coincided with defrosting concentrated on the slipfaces of the dunes, which suggests polar processes as a driving factor. This formation/alteration of gullies in the springtime has only been observed in the Tleilax field, and further work will include a complete analysis of MY 32-33, as more images become available, and a comparison of interannual gullying trends. Acknowledgements: This work was funded by MDAP grant NNN13D465T, and work done by A.A. supported by the JPL MSP internship program. References: [1] Hansen et al. (2011) Science, 331, 575-578. [2] B. Horgan and J. Bell (2012) Geophys. Res. Lett., 39 [3] C. Hansen et al. (2015) Icarus, 251, 264-267. [4] S. Diniega et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, Abstract. (submitted). [5] N. Bridges et al. (2012) Nature, 485, 339-42. [6] E. Gardin et al. (2010) Journal of Geophys. Res. 115.   Figure 2: HiRISE images ESP_033121_2635 (top) and ESP_034611_2635 (middle) of a Tleilax field dune, taken at Ls 9.1 and 62.6 of MY 32, respectively. White arrows indicate alcoves visible beneath frost. Blue arrows in the top image indicate two features where underlying material has recently been excavated. The same features, shown ~100 sols later in the middle image, have become extensive flow features. ESP_035666_2635 (bottom) shows the same area at Ls 98.7 of MY 32, at the onset of summer. The dune is completely defrosted, and all but the largest gully’s alcove are only subtley visible.   50 m 1759.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
