 INVESTIGATION OF AQUEOUS PROCESSES IN VALLE GRANDE LAKE, VALLES CALDERA AS A MARTIAN ANALOG. R. S. Jackson1, H. E. Newsom1, P. J. Fawcett1; 1Univ. of New Mexico (Albuquerque, NM 87131; rjacks04@unm.edu).   Introduction: The Valles caldera, in the Jemez Mountains in north Central New Mexico, is part of the Jemez Volcanic field and is located at the intersection of the Rio Grande Rift and the Jemez lineament; the Valles is the type example of a resurgent dome caldera. This type of caldera is formed when after the collapse of a large ignimbrite caldera, the caldera floor undergoes uplift to form a large central dome.  Valles caldera was formed ~1.25 Ma erupting about 330 km3 worth of material that formed the Tshirege member of the Bandelier Tuff; resurgence occurred within 54 ka in concurrence with the eruption of the upper Bandelier Tuff. These processes resulted in the caldera having a distinct geometry with the resurgent dome located near the location of what was previously the center of the collapsed caldera. The Valles caldera, due to its young age and relatively dry climate, is a well preserved volcanic feature [1].  Figure 1: A digital elevation map of Valles caldera with the extent of the Valle Grande and Valle San Antonio lakes [Goff 2010]. The 'x' marks the location of the VC-3 drill site.    The Valle Grande lake was a long-lived (~180 ky) Pleistocene lake located within a moat valley in the southeastern portion of the Valles caldera. The lake was formed when a post-caldera eruption of rhyolite dammed the drainage out of the southeastern valley of the caldera. The resulting lake was ~11 km long, up to 5 km wide, and at least 125 m deep; although, it is possible that the basin was not filled completely before the rhyolite dam was breached [2]. In 2004, scientific drilling of the Valle Grande returned ~75 m of sediment; the subsequent research on the sediment provided insight into the climate of the two interglacial periods and three glacial periods, referred to as Marine Isotope Stages (MIS), preserved in the sediments [3]. The basin has a geochemically restrained watershed dominated by compositionally similar rhyolites, which allows for variations in chemical composition of the deposited sediment to be understood as diagnostic of variation in the environment and the nature of the depositional processes in the lake. Previous work has shown variation in the redox conditions of the lake; as well as, changes of the sedimentary flux correlated to the glacial-interglacial cycles [4]. The original chemical analyses on the drill core sediment quantified a wide range of elements, but it did not quantify Li. Li can be important as it is a highly fluid mobile element which is incorporated into clays, either as part of the mineral structure or in the interlayer region [5]. Li is moderately incompatible in fluid melts, but it is highly compatible in sedimentary systems [6]. Valles caldera provides a useful sight to study Li, as the fresh rhyolites at this location have higher Li concentrations than similar rhyolites at other calderas [7].  Figure 2: Photograph of Valle Grande taken from the base of Cerro del Medio which constrained the Northern shore of the paleo-lake.  This region provides a useful analog for Gale Crater as it is an igneous setting with a short source to sink distance and it is in an arid environment. In addition, this region records climatic changes in a lacustrine environment which the sedimentary layers in Mount Sharp are also thought to also record. The Curiosity Rover has a mission goal to understand the climatic changes at its landing site, Gale Crater; the crater is a closed geochemically constrained basin like Valle Grande. It is hoped that understanding source-to-sink geochemical alteration in the terrestrial system will allow for a better understanding of the system at Gale Crater.  Figure 3: Variation in Li abundance with depth down the drill core. The average for MIS 11 and MIS 12 are also displayed.  Analytical Details: The cored sediment was previously analyzed with ICP-OES over 20 cm intervals down the first 53 meters and at 60 cm intervals afterwards [4]. To complement the previous work, 25 samples were collected from the 16 m to 40 m intervals, which correspond to MIS 11 and 12. These samples were analyzed with an updated ICP-OES system so that Li could be quantified in addition to the wide range of elements previously quantified. Furthermore, 18 samples were collected from the source region around Valle Grande, including 2 soil samples; these samples were analyzed with ICP-OES and X-Ray Diffraction. Additionally, three samples of rhyolite were analyzed with an Electron Microprobe.  Figure 4: Distribution of Li abundances for Valle Grande sediment and rock samples. The rock average and drill core sediment averages are also displayed, the error bars are 1 standard deviation. Results: This work began with a quantification of 25 samples from 16-40 m down the drill core; this range corresponds to 1 glacial period (MIS 12) and 1 interglacial period (MIS 11). Figure 3 displays the average Li abundance for MIS 11 and MIS 12 as well as the change in Li abundance down the core for the segment of interest. MIS 11 has a standard deviation of 5.16 and MIS 12 has a standard deviation of 20.60. This large deviation is due to the 1 outlier at ~35 m depth; however, when this value is removed MIS has an average of 32.2 ppm±4.36. This work additionally compares geochemical data from the source material around the paleo-lake to the geochemistry of the cored sediment. Figure 4 displays the difference between the 2 sample sets. The paleo-lake sediment is enriched in Li compared to the source material; however, there is a large standard deviation in the VC-3 sediment. This variation is due in part to the 1 outlier at ~35.43 m depth, and in part to the before mentioned difference in values for the two climatic periods. Conclusion: The increase in Li in the glacial period (MIS 12) compared to the interglacial period (MIS 11) would correlate with an increase in precipitation. This suggests a sedimentary layer with increased Li compared to other proximal layers experienced a greater amount of precipitation during the interval it was deposited. Additionally, the sediment in this location behaves as would be expected and Li is concentrated in the lake sediment. These results are useful because it shows that Li was probably not significantly washed down through the sediment, or washed away when the basin drained. References: [1] Phillips, E. H. et al. (2007), J. Geophys. Res., 112, 08201. [2] Reneau, S. L., et al. (2007) New Mexico Geological Society Guidebook, 58th Field Conference, Geology of the Jemez Mountains Region II.  [3] Fawcett, P. J., et al. (2007). New Mexico Geological Society Guidebook, 58th Field Conference, Geology of the Jemez Mountains Region II. [4] Johnson, C. M., Fawcett, P. J., & Ali, A. M. S. (2007). New Mexico Geological Society Guidebook, 58th Field Conference, Geology of the Jemez Mountains Region II. [5] Horstman, E. L. (1957), Geochim. et Cosmochim. Acta, 12, 1-28. [6] Ryan, J. G., & Langmuir, C. H. (1987). Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 51(6), 1727-1741. [7] Shaw, D. M., & Sturchio, N. C. (1992). Geochimica et cosmochimica acta, 56(10), 3723-3731. 