1796.PDF
RESOLVING THE ANCESTRY OF GEMS WITH CHILI. K. L. Villalon1,2,3, H. A. Ishii4, J. P. Bradley4, T. Stephan1,2,3, and A. M. Davis1,2,3,5. 1Department of the Geophysical Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, 2Chicago Center for Cosmochemistry, 3Robert A. Pritzker Center for Meteoritics and Polar Studies, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL, USA, 4Hawaiʻi Institute of Geophysics & Planetology, University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI, USA, 5Enrico Fermi Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. E-mail: kvillalon@uchicago.edu.   Introduction: Glass with Embedded Metal and Sulfides (GEMS) are amorphous silicate grains that are a common and abundant constituent of primitive interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) [1]. The question still remains as to their location and mechanism of formation. The similarities between the chemical and physical properties of GEMS and interstellar silicates—such as their sizes, shapes, structures, and chemical compositions—led to the proposition that GEMS are the interstellar products of isotopic and chemical (partial) homogenization of isotopically anomalous, circumstellar grains by sputtering due to heavy irradiation in conjunction with recondensation of previously sputtered material [1]. If this hypothesis is correct, GEMS are interstellar material and would therefore provide critical insight into processes acting on grains in the interstellar medium (ISM). They may potentially display a gradient of properties outlining the lives of such grains from the time they leave their host stars until they are incorporated into a protoplanetary disk. A competing hypothesis argues that GEMS formed in the solar nebula by late-stage, nonequilibrium condensation [2]. If this is the case, GEMS are instrumental in understanding early Solar System processes. In either case, they are an integral component of primitive solids. Large isotopic anomalies verify presolar—and thus interstellar—origins, though solar isotopic composition does not preclude a presolar origin. Exposure to radiation can homogenize and effectively erase presolar isotopic signatures and some presolar grains may also initially condense with isotopically solar compositions. Some GEMS have mineral cores that have been interpreted as being either relict circumstellar material or solar nebula condensation nuclei. These mineral cores are primarily olivine or pyrrhotite and less commonly enstatite or kamacite [3]. If they are indeed relict, they may retain large isotopic anomalies. Several GEMS have been confirmed to be presolar based on their O isotopic compositions [2]; however, with sizes ranging from 100 to 500 nm with 5–10 nm inclusions, the majority of GEMS are too small to be spatially resolved from the highly abundant Solar System silicates with available techniques. It is therefore possible that the remaining GEMS are also presolar but their presolar signatures have been extensively homogenized or obscured due to analytical limitations. Furthermore, relict cores of pure iron sulfide or iron metal would not display anomalies in O isotopes. For these reasons, it is necessary to not only perform isotopic measurements with improved spatial resolution and sensitivity, but to expand the measurements to additional elements apart from O. To this end, we propose to measure the isotopic composition of GEMS from prescreened, minimally altered interplanetary dust particles using the recently completed CHILI instrument at the University of Chicago.  Instrumentation: The Chicago Instrument for Laser Ionization (CHILI) is a new nanobeam resonance ionization mass spectrometer (nano-RIMS) developed at the University of Chicago [4]. CHILI was designed to achieve an unprecedented lateral resolution of 10 nm and a useful yield of ~40%. CHILI has six tunable Ti:sapphire lasers that allow for the isotopic measurement of three elements simultaneously. With its higher spatial resolution coupled with its ability to eliminate isobaric interferences, the CHILI instrument will be far better equipped than current SIMS instruments to resolve the true isotopic composition of GEMS as well as presolar silicates, which may clarify the relationship, if any, between the two.  First analyses on natural samples were reported previously [5]. The Sr and Ba isotopic compositions were measured in presolar SiC grains by applying a 351 nm Nd:YLF desorption laser beam focused to ~1 µm. Though still being optimized, CHILI already outperforms previous generations of RIMS instruments. It is expected that CHILI will reach its design specifications within this year, and Fe and Ni isotopic measurements on natural samples are underway. Scientific Considerations. If indeed presolar, the isotopic composition of GEMS with relict silicate cores should show a connection to presolar silicates. Oxygen isotope ratios are typically used to classify presolar silicates [6]; however, O cannot be analyzed using CHILI. Nevertheless, the stellar sources of many presolar silicates cannot be resolved by O isotopes alone. Unfortunately, their small size makes multielement analyses difficult, so only a handful of other elements have been studied. Previous isotopic studies on the major elements Mg, Si, and Fe (see [7] and references therein) in presolar silicates have provided valuable insights but are sometimes ambiguous or conflict with nucleosynthetic models, likely owing at least in part to aforementioned limitations and thus should be revisited. Iron isotopic measurements by SIMS pose 1796.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
an added problem as they suffer from isobaric interferences, a problem eliminated in RIMS.  The major elements (>1 at%) in GEMS are O, Si, Fe, Mg, S, Al, Ca, and Ni. Oxygen and S cannot be analyzed using CHILI. The remainder are favorable for analysis with CHILI due to their high elemental abundances. Minor and trace elements that have been measured in GEMS are Cr, Mn, and Ti [8]. Chromium and Ti, as well as yet undetected trace heavy elements such as Zr and Mo, may prove to be particularly diagnostic of the origins or conditions sustained by GEMS.  AGB stars are the most prolific producers of silicate dust and, correspondingly, most presolar silicates have O isotope ratios that reflect AGB origins with <10% coming from other sources such as supernovae [9]. Thus, elements that are sensitive to nucleosynthetic processes in AGB stars will be essential when analyzing presolar silicates and GEMS with CHILI, particularly main s-process elements. However, presolar GEMS with components reportedly originating from both low-mass AGB stars as well as supernovae (SNII) have been identified [2]. It is possible that many more GEMS than presolar silicates originate in supernovae or that the processing of GEMS in the ISM may have been uniquely shaped by frequent encounters in supernova shocks as proposed by [10]. These grains should instead show anomalies in the products indicative of explosive nucleosynthesis, such as large excesses in 28Si. Though the exact site of the r-process is unknown, it likely occurs in core-collapse supernovae. Significant enrichments in r-process elements is therefore expected, particularly for A > 90 as a weak sprocess signature may be present for A < 90 [11]. To date, no presolar silicates or GEMS have been analyzed for trace heavy elements such as Mo, Zr, Ba, or Sr. Previous RIMS work has been done on trace heavy elements in SiC grains, but O-rich grains such as silicates would probe different domains of star evolution than carbides and graphite. The s-process-only and r-process-only isotopes of such elements should be diagnostic of AGB and supernovae origins, respectively, and would provide important constraints on these nucleosynthetic processes. Zirconium, for example, would be a favorable element to study as it has four sonly isotopes (90Zr, 91Zr, 92Zr, and 94Zr) as well as one r-only isotope (96Zr).  GEMS may store a memory of extinct short-lived radionuclides through their decay products, such as 60Fe, 26Al, and 44Ti. Nickel-60 excesses due to the decay of 60Fe have yet to be detected in presolar grains as a very high Fe/Ni ratio or very high-precision measurements are required. The enhanced Fe contents in presolar silicates and GEMS coupled with the advanced analytical capabilities of CHILI may make this detection more feasible [12]. Similarly, 26Mg excesses due to extinct 26Al or 44Ca excesses due to extinct 44Ti may also be detectable. Titanium-44, a short-lived radionuclide that decays to 44Ca with a half-life of 60 days, is only synthesized in supernovae. If GEMS formed in a supernova environment, excesses in 44Ca would provide strong evidence for this. Isotopic anomalies due to relict pyrrhotite grains would be an important discovery. Iron sulfides have been observed around pre- and post-main sequence stars but appear to be strongly depleted in ISM dust. Irradiation experiments have found that FeS, unlike silicates, is highly radiation resistant. Accordingly, presolar FeS should be close in abundance to presolar silicates [13]. The apparent depletion of FeS in ISM dust may simply be due an observational bias, yet no presolar iron sulfides have been discovered so far. It is possible that iron sulfides are not produced in appreciable quantities in stellar outflows or that another mechanism destroys them. It is also possible that GEMS are the hosts of the missing presolar iron sulfides. Outlook: CHILI is nearing completion and will be prepared to measure the more abundant elements Fe and Ni in GEMS followed by trace heavy elements Sr, Zr, and Ba. At a later time, isotopes of other elements such as Mg, Al, Ca, Ti, Cr, and Mo will be considered. Complementary studies of the isotopic composition of presolar silicates will also be undertaken to clarify not only the stellar sources of these grains, but also the nature of their relationship to GEMS.  References: [1] Bradley J. P. (1994) Science, 90, 1151–1154. [2] Keller L. P. and Messenger S. (2011) GCA, 75, 5336–5365. [3] Bradley J. P. and Dai Z. R. (2004) ApJ, 617, 650–655. [4] Stephan T. et al. (2014) LPS 45, #2242. [5] Stephan T. et al. (2015) LPS 46, #2825. [6] Nittler L. R. et al. (1997) ApJ, 483, 475. [7] Zinner E. (2014) Treatise on Geochemistry, 2nd Ed., 181–213. [8] Bradley J. P. and Dai Z. R. (2009) M&PS, 44, 10, 1627–1642. [9] Nguyen A. N. and Messenger S. (2014) ApJ, 784, 149. [10] Westphal A. J. and Bradley J. P. (2004) ApJ, 617, 1131. [11] Meyer B. S. et al. (1997) Adv. Spac. Res., 19, 729–738. [12] Davis A. M. and Gallino R. (2006) MemSAIt, 77, 885. [13] Keller L. P. et al. (2010) LPS 41, #1172.   1796.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
