1797.PDF
Extended Meteor Hunting With Smartphones as Surveillance CamerasVizi, P. G.1 , Berczi, Sz.2, Csizmadia, Sz.3 Hegedus, T.4; 1MTA Wigner RCP H-1121 BUDAPEST, Konkoly Th. 2933. vizi.pal.gabor@wigner.mta.hu; 2Eötvös University, Institute of Physics, H-1117 Budapest, Pázmány Péter sétány 1/a., Hungary; 3Vega Astronomical Society H-8900 Zalaegerszeg, Berzsenyi u. 8., Hungary; 4Baja Astronomical Observatory, 6500 H-Baja, Szegedi út, Kt. 766, Hungary.Introduction:  We describe a new and very cost effective method which became available nowadays for fireball and meteor hunting by deploying smartphones or tablets - using the spare time of them or with reusing old phones - to extend and expand the possibilities to collect more fireball and meteor tracking data and to position falling.Preliminaries: Authors described in their previous works some methods and examples of successful meteor  hunting  by  gaining  information  from  accidental random fireball  records  of  surveillance  or  ski  resort cameras and gave some methods about estimating the components of medium sized meteors which don't give discoverable amount of fallen pieces. [1][2][3]Figure 1 2010.02.28. 22:24:46 Meteor "Kosice" [1][2]Figure 2 The medium sized Meteor 'Pilis' event [3]Technical  background:  Past: Sophisticated  and well  designed  and  coordinated  meteor  cameras  can cover the sky above a country or a region and can give precise  orbit,  trajectory  and  time  data  with  meteor tracking programs. Those systems are well calibrated. The sum of the covered field is relatively small on the sky above globally.In the past decades computers and connected cameras  gave us  potential  possibilities  to  collect  fireball and meteor data. But the process was relatively complicated and only enthusiasts could spend money and working time to build a system. Nowadays: The  level  of  evolution  of  technology achieved nowadays gives us cheap smart phones and tablets. Large online network can be created by spare time  of  smartphones'  while  charging  at  night  with downloadable free 'online cloud data' surveillance programs. Older unused smartphones can be a part of the network  also.  Cameras  of  smartphones  with  surveillance software can record  and share immediately the fireball events. Smartphone operating systems guarantee the correct timing, global positioning by GPS, also 1797.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
direction and orientation of the picture by built in acceleration sensors. All data are recorded and transmitted immediately to a commonly reachable server. Calibration and error estimation: Error estimation and  corrections  can  be  calculated  immediately  after connection to the network. However it is recommended to improve the position data after a significant event Legal  usage: Surveillance  systems and  programs have  been  written  intentionally  to  prevent  against thieves, burglars and robbers. It is the task for users to choose a correct view direction which can serve both the classical surveillance and meteor hunting functions together and according to the local valid laws. A necessary bad cause - efforts against crime - can additionally serve the science; it gives an extra meteor hunting function.Safety: It  is possible to use safely smartphones as shared cameras by turning off the personal data transmission  but  all  necessary  data  can  be  shared  at  the same time for example. GPS position, camera direction etc. as described above. Login  methods  and  programs: We  use  Android phones and all of them can handle more accounts. We suggest to create account login names from locations (GPS),  azimuth and altitude degrees.  Example:  name first:  Meteor,  last:  Hunter,   e-mail  from the  GPS in decimal mh4748179512045@gmail.com which means 47.48 North (4 digits), 17.95 East (4 digits), azimuth 120° (3 digits, 0-360), altitude 45° (2 digits 0-90). We use  the  Alfred  surveillance  program  on  Android phones, which sends an automatic 5 sec long video to a server from a sky event. We organize and coordinate contributors sending an e-mail to authors.   Automatic calculations: It  is  possible to compute the orbits of fireballs from shared smartphone pictures by using EXIF  info  and  with 3D scanner  programs. EXIF info contains all necessary picture data like GPS position,  angle  of  view  of  camera,  resolution,  etc. Automatic preliminary orbit analysis goes on its way.Improving: After the startup period experts or enthusiasts  can  write  and  develop  they  own improved open system programs for Android, Windows Phone or iPhone platform. Examples: As we described in our previous works several analysis were made successfully after surveillance  function  camera  observations.  We  analyzed fallen pieces of Meteor Cosice [1][2] and we estimated the composition of the medium sized 'Pilis' event from brightness  of  RGB colors  using the  Planckian  black body locus diagram. [3].We collected and processed some recent events to achieve the available results. We tried to synchronize videos of the same events using timing of the most reliable time data and the brightness of the fireball through the frames of  the video.  Results are  collected  into a multi window video where main flash frames are the synchronous events of the serial of frames. Smartphones give similar good quality pictures as visible in examples described above and we can expect higher resolution in the future. Figure 3 2015:03:15 19:44:06 Event 'Switzerland' [4] Figure 4 2015.04.06. 17:30:53 Event 'Buk' [5]Summary: Usage of smartphones and tablets can enhance the covering of fireball and meteor events and improve the availability of data immediately. However the calibrated meteor finder camera network can give more accurate data but it is better than nothing and expands the covering of  events.  Quick share  of  digital data can enlarge the possibility to collect more contemporary meteorites for study or analyze records of fireballs to determine their components. The network can increase easily and relatively at very low cost.References: [1] Vizi et al. (2012) LPSC 43rd Abstract #2816 [2] Vizi et al. 35th NIPR Symposium on Antarctic Meteorites Paper E31.[3] Vizi et al.  (2014) LPSC 45th Poster #2838 [4] 2015:03:15 19:44:06 Event 'Switzerland' https://youtu.be/DC3yfx6Pq-Q [5]  2015.04.06.  17:30:53  Event  'Bukhttps://youtu.be/GUA0Z7FJlZU1797.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
