1807.PDF
LONGEVITY OF MARTIAN AEOLIAN SAND: ATTRITION MAY BE MORE BENIGN THAN ON EARTH.  J. Marshall1, 1SETI Institute, N. Bernardo, Mountain View, CA 94043. jmarshall@seti.org    Context: Because martian winds have to be much higher than terrestrial winds in order to entrain sand, it has been suggested that martian sand may be violently self-destructive; so-called "kamikaze grains" [1,2]. Although entraining wind speeds on Mars are indeed much higher than on Earth, the wind force is actually much lower. Recent work provides results contrary to the idea of self-destructive martian sand, and indicates that the martian environment may be less aggressive than Earth's in terms of sand grain comminution. This evaluation included consideration of aerodynamic factors, wind tunnel results, fracture mechanics analysis, laboratory comminution experiments, and evidence from Mars itself. Aerodynamics Analysis: Of importance is the wind force required for aeolian entrainment, not wind speed. The low gravity of Mars enables grains to be entrained with ~1/3 of the wind force required on Earth (even with this weaker force, wind speeds on Mars need to be ~5 times faster than on Earth). It follows that the aerodynamic drag force accelerating the grains downstream is ~3 times weaker than on Earth (at threshold conditions) and we would therefore expect a martian grain to return to the surface at a lower speed than its terrestrial counterpart (and be less destructive). But since Mars gravity is lower, a grain is able to stay aloft in its saltation trajectory and be accelerated for ~3 times longer, which compensates for the weaker acceleration force. However, the negligible martian atmospheric density also allows a grain to fall back to the surface much more rapidly than on Earth, thus partially negating the additional acceleration potential. The net result is a martian grain trajectory of comparable length and speed to one on Earth (probably less) because the force ratios governing trajectory height and length remain constant:  dY α FL/mg and dX α FD/mg. Aerodynamic considerations therefore suggest that saltation on Mars and Earth are similar, nuances of Magnus effects, freefall velocities, and questionable drag coefficients at lift notwithstanding. Consequently, we should expect similar impact speeds from the saltation trajectories, and similar grain attrition. However, on Mars, the lower gravity facilitates a larger reptation population which is a ballistic product of saltation impact -grains are easier to dislodge from the surface, and the ballistic trajectories are higher. Thus, for similar saltation on Earth and Mars, there is much greater secondary grain motion on Mars; this has lower speed than saltation, and therefore the average grain speed on Mars should be less than on Earth. Commensurately, grain comminution should be less on Mars for wind entrainment close to threshold conditions. If Mars were to be more aggressive than Earth with regard to grain attrition, it would require Mars winds in general to exceed threshold by a much larger fraction than on Earth. We have no evidence for this. Wind Tunnel Data: Mars Wind Tunnel data acquired by [3] also indicate that grain speeds at 7 mbar (Mars) should be about the same as for 1 bar (Earth). However, the data in [3] require careful interpretation because they reflect the inherent problems with wind tunnel experiments that attempt to simulate low gravity conditions. Walnut shells were used in the Mars tests which provides correct threshold values if a comparison is being made against terrestrial quartz sand, but because threshold is a function of the ratio FL/mg whereas downwind acceleration of a grain is a function of the ratio FD/m, the grains acquired 2-3 times the speed they would have acquired on Mars. When corrected, the grain speeds are the same as for Earth.    Indications from Mars: Figure 1 shows very recent (Dec 2015) MSL images of the martian Bagnold Dunes. This large dune face is covered with 'microdunes' (with superimposed ripples), and may reflect the presence of a large reptation population with low grain speeds. We note that the smallest dunes on Venus are expected to be only tens of cm in length based on wind tunnel tests [4] where saltation path lengths are only a few cm. In planetary comparisons, transverse dune length appears to scale with grain trajectory length. Since the Mars microdunes are almost certainly not related to ballistic ripples, we might reasonably infer that the dune size reflects the dynamics of the saltation/reptation regime. It is also noted that the ripples upon these microdunes are very small -about 5 cm in wavelength. The wavelength of ripples is controversial, but has been linked to grain trajectory length.   Figure 1: MSL image of Bagnold Dunes showing microdune structures  (~1 m wavelength) imposed on a dune slope. The field of view is about 3 m at the bottom of the image. Fracture Mechanics: The relationship between impact speed and fracture damage to a sand grain was calculated using fracture mechanics data for mineral/rock materials applied within the theoretical frame1807.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
work of Hertzian quasi-static indentation [5]. When fracture size is less than about 0.3D (D=grain diameter), grains become rounded and resist breakage because they require compressive stresses to cause fracture. For fracture sizes >0.4D, grains become angularized and break easily from shear stresses which require less force than compressive stresses. The 'threshold' between these two regimes -i.e., the point at which grains start to become rapidly self destructive is at about 7-10 m/s collision speed if striking rock surfaces. Here the coefficient of restitution COR (a measure of impact force) is about 0.8. For grain collisions in loose sand, the COR is typically 0.05 and requires grains to impact at speeds approaching 120 m/s in order to cause catastrophic (kamikaze) grain comminution. The corresponding wind speeds to generate such high grain velocities, given the weakness of the martian wind, are not achievable (being in excess of sonic speed).  Comminution Experiments: Recent sand grain comminution experiments were conducted in the laboratory as complementary to the aerodynamic and fracture mechanics analyses and the wind tunnel tests. These experiments simulated long-distance aeolian sand transport using mineral targets and retaining the products of comminution. The abrasion device consisted of a 5-cm diameter circular drum filled with sand and slowly rotated to ensure processing of all grains. Grain comminution actually occurred as a result of contact of the grains with an abrasion tool spinning inside the drum (at a pre-set speed) with the tool shaft passing through the drum wall via a dust seal. Basalt, basaltic ash (vesicular), olivine, and quartz were tested. Results from the experiments are in good agreement with theoretical predictions from fracture analysis. They indicate that when grains hit rock with effective collisional speeds of less than ~10 m/s they produce very little loss of grain mass, but grains that begin to exceed this speed (i.e., producing fracture faces >0.3D) start to exhibit massive loss of material. The data lend support to the suggestion that the transition from rounding to angularizing might be a threshold in grain longevity and as such can be expected to manifest itself as a rapid and erratic transition in grain evolution. It was observed to be erratic for speeds of ~7-18 m/s because within this range, slight differences in material properties (cleavage, crystallinity, hardness, etc.) are expressed at the threshold, but overridden at higher energy conditions where impact forces always exceed material strength. When the experimental impact forces against the mineral targets are mathematically converted to equivalent impact forces for grains striking loose sand (based on experimentally-derived COR ratios), the results are similar to those from theoretical fracture mechanics, namely, that grain speeds needed for kamikaze behavior are not physically possible.   Conclusions: From analyses, experiments, wind tunnel data, and MSL imagery, it is concluded that grain speeds on Mars are no greater than on Earth (at threshold of aeolian transport) and perhaps even less on average. Correspondingly, grain longevity for martian dune sands should be equal to or greater than on Earth. Rudimentary estimates of grain longevity on Mars indicate potential grain lifetimes of thousands of years for intermittent (dune-cycling) transport at speeds close to threshold. Sand grains in dunes and sand seas on Mars experience abrasion that is similar to, or perhaps more benign than on Earth.  Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the NASA PG&G Program. References: [1] Melosh J. (2011) Planetary Surface Processes, Cambridge. [2] Sagan C. (1973) JGR, 78 (20), 41554161. [3] Greeley R. et al. (1983) Eolian Sediments and Processes (Brookfield & Ahlbrandt eds.) 133-148. [4] Marshall J.R. and Greeley R. (1992) JGR, 97, 1007-1016. [5] Marshall J. and Rizk B. (2015) Planet. & Space Sci., 119, 181-184.    1807.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
