1845.PDF
DEUTERATION OF INSOLUBLE ORGANIC MATTER AND SILICATES BY IONIZING IRRADIATION IN THE SOLAR NEBULA.  B. Laurent1, M. Roskosz 2, L. Remusat2, H. Leroux1, 1UMET, Université Lille 1, CNRS UMR 8207,Villeneuve d'Ascq, 59655, France; 2IMPMC, UMR CNRS 7590, Sorbonne Université, UPMC, IRD, MNHN, Paris, France (mathieu.roskosz@mnhn.fr).   Introduction:  Organic matter found in carbonaceous chondrites is highly enriched in deuterium, relative to H2 in the protosolar nebula (PSN) [1]. It is also enriched compared to the bulk "chondritic water" mainly adsorbed on or dissolved in silicate and oxide grains [2]. In the scenario where the insoluble organic matter (IOM) is a PSN product, ionmolecule or gas-grain reactions could lead to a D-enrichment of organics. The ionizing irradiations in the protosolar nebula potentially promotted such mechanisms. Recent experimental irradiations of natural and synthetic analogues of the IOM have shown that electron irradiation could act as a driving mechanism for D-enrichment [3-6]. Furthermore, if such irradiation occurred in the PSN, it may also have modified the D/H signature of hydrous silicates hypothetically formed before the accretion of the parent bodies [7-8]. However, little is known about the pre accretion history of such hydrated silicates. In particular, if ionizing irradiations have significant effects on the mineralogy and structure of silicates [9], the way it may shape the hydrogen isotopic signature of hydrated silicates is unknown. In this context, we conducted irradiation experiments on a large array of well-characterized analogues of the IOM and of hydrous silicates. Methods:  All the organic samples consist of thin polymer films, from 1 to 10 µm thick. Polyethylene, (PE), Polyethyleneterephtalate (PET) and Polystyrene (PS) were used. They bear three different CH groups (benzylic, aliphatic and aromatic) in various proportions. In addition, two types of hydrous silicate analogues were studied. They consist of amorphous hydrated SiO2 and serpentine thin films (400nm thick). The samples were prepared by ion sputtering method on a silicon wafer substrate. A commercial muscovite pellet (25 µm thick) was used as a proxy for crystalline hydrous silicates.  Samples were irradiated in a SEM at energies ranging from 4 to 30 keV, at room temperature. The typical irradiated area was 50x50 µm. The electron doses, i.e. the amount of deposited energy per unit volume, ranged from 1.6 1024 to 1.41025 eV cm-3. These doses correspond to typical exposure durations as short as a few hundred years, according to the current understanding of the dynamics of protoplanetary disks and taking into account the fact that direct ionizing irradiation is essentially effective on a thin layer of the disk surface [10, 11].  Samples were then characterized by using FourierTransform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToFSIMS), Electronic Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR), and nano Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (NanoSIMS). Results: Electron irradiation of the three polymers affects their structures in a similar way. First, for each polymer, the intensity of the infrared signal decreases relative to all of the C-H groups, namely CH2, CH and ring at similar rates (Fig. 1). This indicates that all C-H bonds are simultaneously affected by irradiation. Hence, the decrease of the signal of the functional C-H groups is independent of the dissociation energy of individual C-H bonds. Second, these infrared features and the decrease of the H+/C2H4+, measured by ToF-SIMS, follow a comparable trend for the three polymers (Fig. 1). All of these structural and compositional data can be described by a single first-order rate equation.   Figure 1: Structural and compositional evolution of the three polymers. A combination of ToF-SIMS and FTIR data are presented for (a) polyethylene (PE), (b) polystyrene (PS) and (c) polyethylene terephthalate (PET). Data are all normalized between 0 and 1, allowing a direct comparison of different physical quantities. All evolutions are relative to the properties of the non-irradiated precursor.  More importantly, a strong correlation between the structural, compositional and isotopic evolutions is observed for all samples [6]. As the electron dose increases, the δD of each polymer increases until it reaches a plateau value. Each polymer exhibits a different isotopic plateau, despite their comparable rates of structural and compositional evolution. These plateau values correspond to the maximum bulk isotopic compositions (relative to the non-irradiated starting materials), with δD values of 463±113%, 315±30% and 272±60% for PE, PS and PET, respectively. This is a consequence of the nature and the relative proportions of the different C-H groups present in the starting material. 1845.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Turning to the silicates, the local composition is preserved over the irradiation experiment. Isotopic depth profiles were carried out. A large deviation from the initial isotopic signature of the three samples was found down to about 100 nm deep for the 4 keV irradiation series (Fig. 2). The largest deuteration measured is as high as δD=510±75‰. The magnitude of this fractionation depends on the deposited energy. It is highly correlated to the drop of the measured H counts (which is related to the water content of the samples). The depths over which the profiles were resolved correspond to the penetration depth of the incident electrons.   Figure 2: Isotopic composition of amorphous hydrous silica as a function of depth, and three different electron doses. The sample was a thin film irradiated at 4 keV.  Discussion: In the IOM, the nature and the relative proportions of the different C-H groups control the extent of the bulk isotopic signature under ionizing irradiation. From the plateau values, the individual isotopic signatures of aliphatic, aromatic and benzylic C-H bonds of the irradiated polymers were calculated. Assuming local equilibrium, the intramolecular fractionation factors associated with the irradiation process were then derived [6]. These values are in remarkable agreement with the intramolecular fractionation factors determined from the IOM of the Orgueil meteorite [12]. Our study therefore shows that the heterogeneous distribution of H isotopes at the molecular scale in Orgueil IOM is likely a result of an ionizing irradiation process on different types of C-H groups. For silicates, a deuteration of the irradiated targets is also observed. Nonetheless, the penetration depth of the electrons is much lower in silicates than in organics. This depth does not exceeds 120 nm for incoming electrons accelerated at a few keV. As a consequence, the measured isotopic depth profiles (planar geometry) were used to model the evolution of the bulk isotopic composition of spherical particles of hydrous silicates. Small particles, typically a few hundreds of nm, represent a favorable case for a significant isotope fractionation under electron irradiation at the keV energy level. For larger particles, their core will remain unaffected by irradiation and therefore will limit the overall deuteration of the particles. For the three types of silicates, the data plot along a single trend as a function of the remaining fraction of hydrogen. The deuteration can be modeled by a Rayleightype distillation equation (Fig. 3). The fit to the data is consistent with a pure kinetic effect.   Figure 3: Evolution of the integrated D/H ratio for amorphous and crystalline samples, irradiated at 4 and 30 keV, as a function of the remaining fraction of hydrogen.  From the experimental results, a quantitative deuteration model is derived. This model accounts for both structural and isotopic evolutions of the IOM and silicates. Starting from a similar D/H signature, the deuteration of silicate grains larger than a few hundreds of nanometers is very limited. On the contrary, the deuteration of micron-sized particles of IOM is very efficient after a few thousands of years of exposure. Our results are thus consistent with the decoupling observed, for a given meteorite, between the D-rich IOM and the less deutrerated water bound to the silicates [2]. This is especially true for CI meteorites such as Orgueil. Finally, our results suggest that both the precursors of the IOM and the water (in silicates) in Orgueil may have had the same initial isotopic composition similar to most of the water of the inner bodies. More generally, an ionizing irradiation fractionation process could potentially explain the systematic D-enrichment measured in the IOM relative to the water present in carbonaceous chondrites.   References: [1] Robert F. and Epstein S. (1982) GCA, 46, 81-95. [2] Alexander et al., (2010) GCA, 74, 4417-4437. [3] De Gregorio B. et al (2010) GCA, 74, 4454-4470. [4] Le Guillou C. et al (2013) Icarus, 226, 101-110. [5] Laurent et al., (2014), GCA, 142, 522-534. [6] Laurent et al., (2015), Nature Com., 6, 8567. [7] Ciesla F. et al. (2003) Science 299 549-552. [8] Morris M. et al. (2009) Astrobiology 9 965. [9] Carrez Ph. et al. (2002) MAPS 37,1615-1622. [10] Ciesla F. (2010) Ap.J. 723, 514-529. [11] Feigelson E. D., et al., (2002) Ap.J. 572, 335-349. [12] Remusat L. et al., (2006) EPSL 243, 15-25. 1845.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
