1878.PDF
ORIGIN OF FLUVIAL CHANNELS IN THE WALLS OF JUVENTAE CHASMA: EVIDENCES OF GROUNDWATER SAPPING? P. Singh1, R. Sarkar1, I. Ganesh1 and A. Porwal1, 1Geology and Mineral Resources Group, CSRE, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India (pragya.singh@iitb.ac.in)   Introduction:  Juventae Chasma is a deep boxcanyon located to the north of Valles Marineris. The main geological units of the chasma are chaotic terrain, four mounds of interior layered deposits (ILDs) and an outflow channel.  The presence of the outflow channel indicates that water played an important role in the geological and geomorphological evolution of the chasma.  In this paper, we report ground-water sapping features from the wall of Juventae Chasma. We also delineate and characterize fluvial channels originating from the chasma wall. This study was carried out using panchromatic data from the CTX and digital terrain models from the HRSC onboard the MRO and MEX respectively.  Morphology of the Canyon Wall: The wall of Juvantae Chasma is characterized by spur-and-gully features. The absence of straight segments along the wall indicates a lack of structural/tectonic control. The south wall is characterized by curvilinear outlines with the mean slope ranging between 20ᵒ and 30ᵒ. The south-western part of the chasma wall shows amphitheater-headed channels with V-shaped profiles, possibly formed by groundwater sapping [1]. The south-eastern part of the wall contains relatively short and much broader tributary canyons. A hook-shaped tributary canyon is present in the northern part of the chasma wall.  Types of fluvial channels: We identify the following four types of fluvial channels indicating the presence of flowing water in the wall of Juventae chasma at some stage in its geological history.  Type I: They are relatively broad and long, single flow channels with a few short channels (4-5 km) flowing into them. They occur on a collapse pit inside a crater in the eastern wall of the chasma (Fig. 1a).  Type II: These fluvial channels are associated with the tributary canyons. They comprise broad channels that emerge from groundwater sapping and show headward erosion on the chasma wall, sometimes cutting into the basalt plateau (Fig. 1b).  Type III: This type of channel include dense networks of small branching channels, often mimicking the dendritic pattern. These channels are mostly found on the western wall of the chasma near the ILD Mound B (Fig. 1c). At places they are cut across by a younger network of broad channels.   Type IV: This type includes channels emanating from gullies between the spurs on the chasma wall (Fig. 1d). They are mainly found in the southern wall of the chasma. These channels have shorter lengths ranging from 1-6 km and at places converge into a single channel. Age determination: We estimated the ages of the geological units containing Type 1 and Type III channels using crater size-frequency distributions. The results indicate that Type 1 channels are younger than 790+- 200 Ma and Type III channels are younger than 620+-300 Ma. Type II and IV were left out because of considerable degradation of the containing units.  Discussion: The presence of amphitheatre headed tributary canyons without upstream water sources along the chasma wall indicate that groundwater sapping is the possible mechanism for their formation [1]. We observe different types of water-cut channels from different portions of the walls. These channels do not link to external sources of water and are associated with amphitheatre-headed canyons, pits or gullies. These observations suggest the channels to have formed due to local ground water sapping. Large valley networks formed in the early history of Mars [2, 3] indicate warm and wet climate; however smaller fluvial features formed in the later age of the planet were possibly carved by subsurface water or melt of snow or permafrost. Such features reveal finer details of the subsequent evolution of the Martian hydrology and climatic condition [4, 5]. The geomorphology of the fluvial channels and sapping features present in the walls of Juventae Chasma point to the presence of water either in the pore spaces or in the form of a confined aquifer. Crater-size-frequency distribution shows that these channels have formed in the middle Amazonian- a time when the cryosphere became sufficient thick (~2 km) to sustain a confined aquifer [6]. Presence of these channels would indicate recent water activity in the last 1 Ga. The presence of rampart craters in the surrounding plateau also support occurrence of fluid in the subsurface [7].   1878.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
References:  [1] Marra et al. (2014) Icarus, 232, 97-117 [2] Milton, D. J. (1973) J. Geophys. Res., 78, 4037-4047 [3] Carr, M. H. (1996) Water on Mars, 229 pp., Oxford Univ. Press, New York. [4] Hanna, J.C. and Phillips, R.J. (2005) J. Geophys. Res., 110, E01004. [5] Christensen, P.R. (2003) Nature 422, 45-48. [6] Clifford and Parker (2001) Icarus, 154(1), 40-79. [7] Peulvast et al. (2001) Geomorphology, 37(3), 329-352. Acknowledgement: We thank Centre for Studies in Resources Engineering, IIT Bombay for their assistance and financial support.       Figure 1. Context mosaic image of Juventae chasma:  (a) black continuous line shows the main channel, small discontinuous lines show other small channels joining the main channel; (b) channels coming out of a tributary; (c) arrows indicating dense networks of small branching channels and continuous lines are the younger network of broad channels (d) channels emerging from the gullies between the spurs. (All the images used in the figures are from CTX mosaic of Google Mars) 1878.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
