1896.PDF
Evolution of an Initially Stratified Liquid Core and Onset of a Dynamo. M. Lasbleis, M. Laneuville, G. HelffrichEarth Life Science Institute (ELSI), Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.Abstract: During accretion of a terrestrial body,the metal merging with the core has a higher temperature than the previously accreted material, forming astably stratified core. Here, we investigate the thermalevolution of such an initially stratified core in order toestimate the onset of convection and early dynamo interrestrial bodies.Introduction: Various workers [1-4] proposed recently that the core of terrestrial planets are likely to beformed stratified. The accretion and differentiation ofterrestrial bodies occur on similar time scales, withmetal segregation occurring shortly after each impacts.The metal equilibrates with the silicates at a pressureand temperature similar to the conditions at the bottomof the surrounding magma ocean before sinkingthrough the solid mantle, either by dykes or diapirs.Because the body is growing with each addition of material, the temperature and pressure of equilibration increase after each accretion steps. The metal mergingwith the core at each steps is thus hotter and lighterthat the previously-segregated material, forming a layered core with material colder at the center (the earlyformed core) and hotter at the core mantle boundary(the latest material added). Figure 1 present an example of a typical accretion scenario to form an Earth sizeplanet, without late giant impact. The temperature ofequilibration increases with time, with discrete steps.In this presentation, we investigate the thermal evolution of such an initially stratified core, with special interest on the onset of convection and dynamo action. Thermal model: For a typical diffusivity value of100 W/m/K, heat diffuses on a characteristic timescaleof a few billion years on the whole Earth’s core. Therefore for an accretion timescale of about 100 Ma, it issafe to decouple the two processes and compute thermal evolution after accretion is complete the initialtemperature profile set. We thus solve the spherical 1dimensional heat diffusion equation for Earth’s corewith variable diffusivity. We consider the diffusivity ofan Fe-Si alloy as a function of temperature and pressure from Gomi et al. [5], as shown on Figure 2 Forthe usual isentropic temperature profile, representingpre-existing convection and thus mixing, the variationof conductivity through the core is about a factor 2,with the highest conductivity in the center. However,with very low temperature at the center of the core, theprofile can be inverted, with low conductivity in thecenter. The white solid line on Figure 2 is the result ofone accretion scenario, with very low temperature atthe very center (about 2000 K) and thus very low conductivity. The characteristic time for the temperatureprofile to reach the isentropic one by heat diffusion isthus lower and convection is expected to start earlierthan usually considered. Figure 2 also shows the initialtemperature profile from Helffrich and Brasser [4]. Weuse this profile as an initial condition, and compute diffusivity consistently with Gomi et al. [5]. In a purely 1dimension model, convection will be consideredthrough an effective diffusivity [6].Mixing of the stratified layer: During the accretion, each impact is susceptible to mix the mantle andthe core. Giant impacts are likely to completely mix upto the core by mechanical effects, but smaller impactscan also mix part or total of the stratification by hydrodynamical mixing. By spreading a lighter material atthe surface of the impacted core, medium core impactor would enhance Rayleigh Taylor instabilities.However, such gravitational currents are not expectedto mix a stratified layer, similarly for example to a pyroclastic flow for which the mixing with the higher atmosphere is negligible. Nevertheless, an important effect need to be taken into account and quantified: eachimpacts, even “hit-and-run” ones, are likely to modifythe rotation rate of the impacted body. Such a rotationvariation is transmitted down to the deeper part of thebody through either viscous friction or Ekmann pumping [7]. For liquid layer such as atmosphere, ocean andFig 1: Example of accretion scenario showing the steps in the temperature profile (personnal communication, G. Helffrich. See [4]). Pressure and temperature at which the metal equilibrate with time increase with the radius of the impacted body. In this scenario, most of the core is formed after about 50 Myrs.1896.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
liquid core, Ekmann pumping is the most efficient wayto advect angular momentum inside the bulk of thelayer. However, no litterature is available yet on Ekmann pumping in stratified fluid, and we will investigate this effect later. Discussion: In this problem, we have not discussedthe evolution of composition of metal with the accretion. As the temperature and pressure of equilibrationincrease, the amount of light elements incorporated inthe metal also increases. This decreases the density ofthe newly accreted material, and creates a compositional stratification. Because of the very low compositional diffusivity of light impurities in metal alloy, thedestabilization of this stratification is even more difficult than the thermal stratification. However, the exactcompositional stratification is difficult to estimate. Itrequires to know the percentage of chemical equilibration between metal and silicates during the differentiation as well as the depth of this equilibration, whichdepends on the physical processes (for example, [8]). Conclusion: To simplify this problem, we studiedonly the thermal stratification of the core of a silicatebody of size similar to Earth. The very early evolutionof such a stratified core is important to study to understand the early onset of dynamics either for the Earthand for other planetary bodies, such as Mars. The keyquestion we are addressing is how and when can a dynamo be started in a strong density stratification? Weshowed that, for scenarios of accretion proposed by[4], the variation of thermal conductivity over thewhole core is very different from the one estimated bylooking at an almost isentropic profile. References: [1] S. Jacobson et al., AGU Fall Meeting 2015, DI41B-04 [2] G. Helffrich and R. Brasser,AGU Fall Meeting 2015, DI41B-01 [3] J. ArkaniHamed, AGU Fall Meeting 2015, P33D-04 [4] G.Helffrich and R. Brasser, subm. to EPSL [5] Gomi etal., Phys. of the Earth and Plan. Int. 224 (2013) 88–103[6] S. Sasaki, and K. Nakazawa, J. Geophys. Res. 91,9231 (1986) [7] Greenspan, The theory of rotatin fluids, The University Press, 1990 [8] R. Deguen, M.Landeau, P. Olson, Earth and Plan. Sc. Lett. 391(2014): 274-287.Fig 2: Conductivity profile of Fe-Si alloy as function of pressure and temperature [5]. White dashed line is the isentropic temperature for the Earth’s core, anchored at 3500K at 130GPa. White solid line is the solution from one accretion scenario of a body of size similar to the Earth [4].1896.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
