1897.PDF
CrsCrsCrsCrsAmAmFe-Ox Figure 1: SEM-BSE image of alteration of cristobalite in a silica-bearing rim in a type I chondrule in EET 92042. Cristobalite (Crs) which sometimes contains inclusions of an Fe-oxide (Fe-ox) phase has been replaced by a Si-Fe-rich amorphous gel phase (Am) along grain boundaries and fractures. Red arrows indicate concentric zones within the amorphous phase. DISSOLUTION AND REPLACEMENT OF CRISTOBALITE BY AMORPHOUS Fe-RICH SILICATE GEL IN SILICA-BEARING TYPE I CHONDRULES IN THE ELEPHANT MORAINE (EET) 92042 CR2 CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITE Adrian J. Brearley1 and Rhian H. Jones2, 1Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, MSC03-2040, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA (brearley@unm.edu), 2School of Earth, Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences, University of Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom (rhian.jones2@manchester.ac.uk).  Introduction:  The CR chondrite group records a remarkably pristine record of early solar system processes [1-5]. Although CR chondrites are typically classified as petrologic type 2, they show a range of degrees of aqueous alteration from incipient to complete [3-6]. Hence, the CRs provide an excellent opportunity to study the process of progressive aqueous alteration. Such studies provide important information on the effects of aqueous fluids on the pristine materials of carbonaceous chondrite asteroids.   Several studies have described the effects of aqueous alteration on matrix, chondrules and opaque assemblages in CR chondrites [3-6]. Alteration of chondrules is generally minimal in most CR2 chondrites. However, quite extensive replacement textures are present at the peripheries of chondrules [5,7-9]. Paradoxically these textures appear to be present only in CR chondrites that otherwise show quite limited evidence of aqueous alteration [8,9]. This alteration has been described as “smooth phyllosilicate” [5,7]. However, in a recent study of EET 92042 we found that this alteration is closely associated with silica at the peripheries of silica-rich rims on type I chondrules, and we suggested that it is amorphous [7]. Here we report in detail on these alteration features in an effort to more fully understand the alteration history of the CR chondrites.  Samples and Methods: We studied two polished sections of EET 92042 using SEM-BSE imaging and EPMA. Two chondrules with silica-bearing rims were selected for detailed study using TEM. We extracted three FIB sections from different regions of altered silica in two different type I chondrules. Each FIB section has been investigated by a variety of TEM techniques (HRTEM, DF-STEM, EDS, STEM-EDS X-ray mapping, and electron diffraction). Raman analysis was performed using a Tescan RISE instrument. Results: Chondrules with silica-bearing rims have been widely described in CR chondrites [10] and occur in moderate abundance in EET 92042 [8]. All chondrules with silica-bearing rims that we studied exhibit evidence of alteration [8]. Silica phenocrysts in the rims have been variably replaced by a smooth textured, Si-Fe-rich hydrated phase which texturally and compositionally resembles the “smooth phyllosilicate” rims described by [5,7]. Replacement of the silica occurs around the periphery of the grains and along cracks with replacement zones on individual grains reaching a maximum thickness of ~ 5µm (Fig. 1). Concentric bands of alteration are present surrounding each silica grain. Alteration is most advanced where the silica is in direct contact with the surrounding fine-grained matrix. The interface between the alteration and the finegrained matrix is decorated by a layer of micron to submicron-sized Fe and Fe, Ni sulfide grains.  TEM and STEM imaging show that the alteration of the silica-bearing rims is complex and also provide insights into the mechanism of the alteration reaction (Fig. 2). µRaman analysis identifies the silica polymorph as cristobalite and electron diffraction data show that the phase is -cristobalite (low cristobalite). The cristobalite grains sometimes contain clusters of euhedral inclusions of an as yet, unidentified, very Ferich (~85 wt% FeO, ~6 wt% SiO2, ~2 wt% S), nanocrystalline phase.  The cristobalite grains have sharp, either planar or curved interfaces with the surrounding alteration phase (Fig. 2). Based on µRaman, HRTEM and electron diffraction studies the replacement phase is amorphous, but it does contain some nanocrystalline material. There is no evidence of phyllosilicates in any of the 1897.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
 Figure 2: Dark-field STEM image of silica alteration. Cristobalite (Crs) grains contain inclusions and veinlets of an Fe-oxide phase (Fe-ox) and have also been replaced by an amorphous Fe-silicate gel (Am). Narrow veins of Fe-oxide (red arrows) also occur within the gel. Pores are shown by yellow arrows.  regions studied. The amorphous material is texturally homogeneous, but locally contains submicron pores.  Microprobe analyses of the alteration phase show that it is compositionally simple, containing only SiO2 and FeO as the major elements, with a wide range of minor elements and low totals [7], consistent with a hydrated phase. STEM EDS analysis on different regions within the alteration yield a range of compositions from 51-57 wt% SiO2 and 41-45 wt% FeO. DF STEM imaging confirms that distinct, submicron bands, are present within the amorphous material. Where alteration has occurred along cracks in the cristobalite, these bands are symmetrically distributed along the fracture. The amorphous phase also replaces the FeO-rich nanocrystalline vein-filling material which crosscuts cristobalite.  Additional features within the zones of amorphous phase are thin (<0.3 µm) FeO-rich veins that typically run parallel to the sides of the alteration zone.  Discussion: These new observations demonstrate that cristobalite in SiO2-bearing type I chondrules has been replaced by a hydrated Fe-rich amorphous silicate gel, not crystalline phyllosilicates. Based on the similarity of this material to ‘phyllosilicate rims’ [5,7], we suggest that the other occurrences in the least altered CR chondrites are also likely to be an amorphous phase and not crystalline phyllosilicates.  Textural and chemical characteristics of the amorphous phase provide some important insights into the earliest stage of CR chondrite alteration. The process was clearly complex and involved several different stages of alteration, based on crosscutting relationships between different alteration products. The first alteration event appears to be the replacement of euhedral Fe-rich inclusions in cristobalite by a nanocrystalline Fe-oxide or oxyhydroxide. This was followed by dissolution of cristobalite and its replacement by the hydrated Fe-bearing silicate gel. The significant alteration of cristobalite demonstrates that it is more susceptible to replacement than even mesostasis glass with which it often coexists. The replacement reaction involves extensive dissolution of silica and transport in solution out of the chondrules into the adjacent matrix. Studies of the solubility of silica polymorphs in aqueous solutions show that cristobalite is significantly more soluble than quartz [11]. The unusual composition of the altering fluid may have also contributed to the rapid alteration of cristobalite. Aqueous fluids in CR chondrites have interacted to a significant extent with the fine-grained matrix [12], which is comparatively Si-poor, but Fe-rich [1,3]. We suggest that the interaction of aqueous fluid with matrix resulted in the formation of a fluid saturated with Fe, but low in silica, favoring dissolution of any silica polymorph. Due to the very low solubility of Fe3+ in aqueous solutions, Fe must have been transported in solution in the ferrous form. The Si-Fe amorphous silicate gel would have precipitated when the solution encountered high concentrations of silica produced by the dissolution of cristobalite. The solubility of silica minerals increases markedly at high pH values (>pH 9). Therefore the advanced alteration of cristobalite may be indicative of alkaline conditions, consistent with thermodynamic modeling of aqueous alteration of carbonaceous chondrites [13]. Preservation of the amorphous silicate is consistent with our previous arguments that alteration of CR chondrites occurred at low temperatures, close to the melting point of water ice [12]. Acknowledgements: This work was funded by NASA Cosmochemistry grants NNX12AH61G and NNX15AD28G. References: [1]  Weisberg M.K. et al. (1993) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 57, 1567-1586. [2] Krot A.N. et al. (2002) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci. 37, 1451-1490. [3] Abreu N.M. and Brearley A.J. (2010) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 74, 1146-1171. [4] Schrader D.L. et al. (2011) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 75, 308-325. [5] Harju E.R. et al. (2014) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 139, 267–292. [6] Weisberg M.K. and Huber H. (2007) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci. 42, 1495–1503. [7] Schrader D.L. et al. (2014) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 132, 50-74. [8] Jones R.H. et al. (2015) 78th MetSoc Meeting, Abstract #5190.  [9] Burger P.V. and Brearley A.J. (2004) 25th LPSC, Abstract #1966. [10] Krot A.N. et al. (2004) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci. 39, 19311955. [11] Holland H.D. (1967) In Geochemistry of hydrothermal are deposits. Ed: Barnes, H.L. pp. 388393. [12] Le Guillou C. and Brearley A.J. (2015) Geochim. Cosmochim Acta 131, 344-367. [13] Zolensky M.E. et al. (1989) Icarus 78, 411-425.  1897.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
