1902.PDF
COMPARISON OF MARTIAN AND TERRESTRIAL DSGSD SCARPS.  O. Kromuszczyńska1* and  K. T. Dębniak1**, 1Planetary Geology Lab, Institute of Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences, Research  Centre in Wrocław, Podwale St. 75, PL-50449 Wrocław, Poland (*okromuszczynska@twarda.pan.pl; **krzysztof.debniak@twarda.pan.pl).   Introduction: Valles Marineris, a 2200 km long trough complex located in the equatorial region of Mars, is a unique extensional province in the Solar System [1,2]. It developed ca. 3.5 Gy ago. It provides an invaluable record of a large fraction of the Martian geological history, as testified by the diversity of landforms that accumulated and interfered throughout the succession of processes that occurred regionally and in the trough system itself.  The walls of Valles Marineris, up to 11 km high, present an exceptional section of the Martian subsurface. The majority of Valles Marineris wallslopes displays a spur-and-gully morphology that was reshaped by uphill-facing normal faults resulting from paraglacial deep-seated gravitational slope deformation (DSGSD) [3]. The diagnostic features of DSGSD are crestal grabens and uphill-facing normal fault scarps (antiscarps). In this paper, DSGSD of the Valles Marineris wallslopes and DSGSD of wallslopes developed as a consequence of Quaternary climatic cycles in the Tatra Mountains, a terrestrial DSGSD site, are compared. Data and methods:  The comparison of DSGSD features on Mars and Earth were prepared on the basis of topographic profiles, which was a method to quantify the scarps. Martian profiles were obtained from CTX DEMs (three study sites). Terrestrial profiles were made during field woks in Tatra Mts. in Poland and Slovakia and Lower Tatra Mts. in Slovakia (seven study sites). The GPS device used for obtaining the profiles was Garmin GPSmap 62s. Martian and terrestrial elevation data were processed in ArcGIS 3D Analyst, the topographic profiles were subsequently analyzed using graphic software. The uphill-facing normal fault scarps were mapped and their height was measured. Scarp height and slope do not represent true fault offset and dip angle; however, fault offset can be retrieved if fault dip angles are assumed (Figure 1). We estimated them in the range of 60-70º, which is typical for many normal faults in extensional settings on Earth [4, 5]. In order to compare the influence of the displacement of the investigated faults on the ridges, two parameters were used. First represents the scaled value of horizontal displacement (Dh), and it is calculated by dividing the average value of horizontal displacement of the faults measured on the ridge by the width of the ridge:  widthridgentdisplacemehorizontalDh   Second parameter is the scaled value of vertical displacement (Dv), and it is obtained by dividing the average value of vertical displacement of the faults on the ridge by the height of the ridge:  heightridgentdisplacemeverticalDv   The comparison is complemented by the height to width ratio (hw) of the examined ridges:  widthridgeheightridgehw   All three parameters were calculated for the investigated topographic ridges.   Figure 1. Parameters used for calculation of vertical and horizontal displacement.  Scale of DSGSD on Mars and Earth:  The investigation of scale of the DSGS affecting the topographic ridges in Valles Marineris shows a resemblance with the terrestrial analogue of this phenomenon. The three examined Martian topographic ridges display a diverse height to width ratio, i.e. from 0.08 to 0.25 (Table 1).   study site CC MC CO KP KW W JS TS VG ORhw 0,25 0,08 0,18 0,16 0,21 0,3 0,28 0,2 0,27 0,19Dh 0,0063 0,0085 0,0075 0,0009 0,0034 0,002 0,0042 0,002 0,0025 0,0024Dv 0,057 0,197 0,09 0,012 0,035 0,014 0,033 0,021 0,021 0,027Mars Earth Table 1. The summary of height to width ratio (hw) of the study sites and the scaled horizontal (Dh) and vertical (Dv) displacement parameters. Study sites: CC – Coprates Chasma internal ridge; MC – Melas-Candor boundary ridge; CO – Candor-Ophir boundary ridge; KP – vicinity of Kondracka pass; KW – vicinity of Kasprowy Wierch and Goryczkowa Czuba; W – ridge SW from Wołowiec; JS – vicinity of Jamnícke sedlo; TS – vicinity of Turkovo sedlo; VG - ridge west from Veľká Garajova kopa; OR – ridge south from Ornak. 1902.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
The range of the height to width ratio obtained for terrestrial study sites is slightly narrower, from 0.16 to 0.3. In the case of Martian topographic ridges, the decrease of the height to width ratio is related to the increase of both scaled horizontal and vertical displacement parameters. This rule does not apply to the examined terrestrial topographic ridges, but the DSGSD features investigated on the terrestrial ridges were usually concentrated close to the crest, where the access with the GPS device is possible. That might influence this difference in hw, Dh, and Dv relationship. The other explanation might be a more intense weathering and erosion of terrestrial ridges in comparison with current active processes on Mars, which could significantly changed the DSGSD topography. At least one order of magnitude of difference in scale exists between the Martian and terrestrial DSGSD features. However, the values of scaled horizontal and vertical displacement parameters are similar for Mars and Earth – they are within the same order of magnitude. Despite of the topographic gradient disproportion, this dependance shows the difference in fault displacement scales with the difference in ridge dimensions. Although the scaled horizontal and vertical displacement parameters for Martian and terrestrial DSGSD are within the same order of magnitude, the values are higher for the topographic ridges in Valles Marineris than in Tatra Mts. There are several explanations for this difference. The observation of the Martian and terrestrial ridges affected by DSGSD deformations indicates that the gravitational potential of Martian slopes due to body forces is much higher than on Earth, since the topography of the Martian ridges experiencing DSGSD is at least one order of magnitude higher (Figure 2).   Figure 2. Differences in topography of the DSGS-affected ridges on Earth and Mars and the gravity conditions show that DSGS is more controlled by the gravitational potential, which is a result of topography, than from the gravity value.  The large stress release produces larger slips. It is important to note that despite of the higher value of gravity on Earth (9.81) than on Mars (3.72), the scaled displacement values are higher on Mars. This implies that the difference in gravity influences the efficiency of DSGSD in the less extent than the difference in gravitational potential does. Another explanation might involve the preexisting tectonic structures in the examined Martian ridges, inherited from the time of Valles Marineris formation. The topographic ridges in Valles Marineris are located parallel to the entire troughs system. The surrounding plateau bears the marks of tectonic features consistent with the Valles Marineris troughs: fractures, faults, grabens. The examined ridges were once components of the plateau and they might have been also fractured by the system of tectonic structures during the formation and evolution of Valles Marineris. The fractures could have existed in the topographic ridges and might have been activated by the gravity due to paraglacial adjustment to the removal of glacier from the adjacent chasmata. An explanation could be also a lithological factor. According to the studies of Valles Marineris slope stability [6], the strength parameters of the wallrocks correspond with fractured basaltic rocks. Lithology of the Valles Marineris hillslopes might resulted in higher susceptibility to deformation caused by DSGSD. Another reason of the disproportion of scaled displacement values could be the number of glaciation and deglaciation cycles that affected the topographic ridges. The repeated appearance and retreat of glaciers in Valles Marineris might have caused the initiation of DSGSD deformation several times. Most probably, the successive deformation steps occurred along the same planes of weakness during the progression of paraglacial conditions, leading to higher values of displacement of the DSGSD faults. Conclusions: The height of hillslopes that experianced DSGSD is in the range of 5-6 km in Valles Marineris and 200-450 m in the Tatra Mts. Topographic analyses showed that the DSGSD in both sites is in the same proportion. However, the scaled mean displacement along the Martian normal faults is larger than on Earth. This could be explained by: (1) fault slip controlled rather by gravitational potential (higher on Mars), than gravity acceleration (larger on Earth), (2) significantly weaker bedrock on Mars due to more intense alteration, (3) deep structural features produced at the time of Valles Marineris formation, which were involved later in DSGS deformations, (4) more cycles of glaciation and deglaciation occured on Mars than on Earth during the Quaternary, which would reactivate the same DSGSD faults in each cycle. References: [1] Schultz R. A. and Lin J.(2001) J. Geophys. Res. 106, B8, 16549-16566. [2] Peulvast J.P. et al. (2001) Geomorphology 37, 329-352. [3] Mège D. and Bourgeois O. (2011) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 310, 182-191. [4] Gudmundsson, A (1992) Terra Nova, 4, 464-471. [5] Acocella V., et al. (2003) J. Struct. Geol., 25, 503-513. [6] Crosta G.B., et al. (2014) Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 388, 329-342. 1902.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
