1953.PDF
ASSESSING THE INCORPORATION OF PORTABLE INFRARED IMAGING INTO PLANETARY GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK. G. Ito1, A. D. Rogers1, K. E. Young2, J. E. Bleacher2, C. S. Edwards3, and T. D. Glotch1, 1Stony Brook University, 255 Earth and Space Sciences Building, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100 (gen.ito@stonybrook.edu), 2NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, MD, USA, 3USGS Flagstaff, AZ, USA.   Introduction: Sample collection, an important science objective in future planetary missions, could benefit from infrared imaging. Portable/hand-held infrared spectral imaging instruments have the potential to provide valuable information that is not easily observable by the human eye. These instruments could aid astronauts by giving them the capability to analyze geological materials in-situ, quickly document the sampling site, and contribute to making strategic decisions in the context of predefined scientific objectives. Ground-based infrared spectral imaging has been used in geological field work in the past [1], but strategies to efficiently incorporate them into geological field work in planetary scenarios are still lacking. For this reason, we assess how well infrared spectral imaging can be incorporated into geological field work in a planetary setting through a series of field campaigns at analog sites. We report assessment of the infrared imaging incorporation efforts from field campaigns conducted at Kilauea Volcano, Hawaii.  Field Site: Kilauea Volcano in Hawaii is a natural analog site to conduct simulations of human planetary missions. The environment and mineralogy of geological materials at Kilauea is similar to the Moon, differentiated asteroids, and Mars. Mineral and spectral characteristics have been characterized well [2, 3], making Kilauea an ideal place to test the use of candidate spectral instruments and evaluate infrared imaging incorporation efforts. In particular, our field site is at a volcanic flow known as the December 1974 Flow and its vicinity. Methodology: Using commercially available products, we have assembled a five band spectral imager that operates in 8-12 µm wavelengths. This is a prototype spectral imaging instrument that is appropriate to be used for assessing the incorporation of infrared imaging into geological field work, but it is not necessarily a real instrument that will be used in actual planetary missions. The chosen wavelength range covers the terrestrial atmospheric window and captures major spectral features of silicate minerals, therefore, it is appropriate for terrestrial analog studies.  In the field, the expedition team simulates a sample collection process that would happen during extravehicular activities on a planetary body. Our team is divided into two groups: the crew and instrument groups. The crew decides where to stop, then, the instrument group operates the instruments with instructions from the crew. Some locations, however, were decided prior to the expeditions based on airborne remote sensing data using Thermal Infrared Multispectral Scanner (TIMS). Spectral data are taken prior to sample collection, but data processing is conducted after sample collection because our prototype instrument has limitations in technology and resources. Instrument data are calibrated to provide emissivity spectra. Emissivity spectra can be used to infer compositional and textural variabilities in the scene. We generate false color images based on emissivity spectra and provide them to the crew members in order to aid sample collection and geological analysis. Results: Processed infrared image products and corresponding scenes in the visible light are shown in Figure 1. Emissivity spectra of some targets within the scene in Figure 1 are plotted in Figure 2.  Discussion: Detailed compositional differences are not always pronounced in the visible light, whereas the infrared spectral imaging is capable of detecting more concealed differences and amplifying the details so that the human eye can easily recognize them. In Figure 1, basaltic sediment on the foreground looks as if there is minimal variability in the visible light at first glance, but the processed image more clearly shows hidden variability within this unit. The spectral differences for the different colored areas are evident in Figure 2. Though taking a very close look at the visible light image may capture similar variability in geological materials in the scene, having the easily recognizable color image is advantageous. These kinds of false-colored images could influence important factors on a planetary surface mission such as decision making time and could enhance field documentations and provide a direct link to orbital data sets. Infrared spectral imaging products are incorporated into geological field work and sample collection workflows are explored. The workflow adopted in this particular work is as follows: 1. Acquire spectral images before an extravehicular activity. 2. Conduct geological field work and collect samples. 3. Process spectral image data. 4. Determine the representativeness of collected samples. 5. Make inferences for future sampling. 6. Document spatial relationships of units in the scene. Technological constraints of the prototype instrument limits the type of workflows that can be adopted 1953.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
now, but we envision that technological constraints will not be a factor for the real instrument. In fact, one of the purposes of this work is to provide experience and suggestions for developing the actual instrument. In a real case, we predict that one way a spectral imaging can fit into a sample collection workflow is as follows: 1. Acquire spectral images before an extravehicular activity. 2. Near-simultaneously process spectral image data and immediately generate readily useable unit-classified images. 3. Conduct geological field work and sample collection using the processed spectral image products. 4. Document spatial relationships of units in the scene. In this kind of workflow, spectral imaging could be used in concert with portable in-situ chemical instruments and serve as one input in making traverse plans in addition to field reconnaissance. For instance, coupling infrared imaging data with X-ray fluorescence spot data can be valuable in addressing specific science questions [4]. Conclusions: We have made initial assessments of the incorporation efforts of infrared imaging into geological field work and sample collections during human planetary missions. Kilauea Volcano, a terrestrial analog, was chosen to simulate sample collection scenarios with the aid of infrared imaging and other instrumentation. Using a prototype instrument, we were able to generate false-color images displaying compositional and textural variabilities that are more advantageous than simple visible light images. Based on our preliminary evaluation, we believe that infrared imaging holds a potential to benefiting planetary geological field work and science return in future human missions. Our field expedition site will move to Potrillo Volcanic Field, NM starting this summer, and we will continue to make better assessments of the incorporation of infrared imaging. References: [1] Ramsey, M. S. and A. J. L. Harris (2013), J. Volc. Geo. Res. 249, 217-233. [2] Minitti M. E. et al. (2007) JGR, 112, E05015. [3] Seelos K. D. et al. (2010) JGR, 115, E00D15. [4] Young, K. E. et al. this meeting. Acknowledgement: Work was conducted within the Hawai’i Volcanoes National Park under National Park Service science permit #HAVO-2012-SCI-0025. Funding is from the RIS4E SSERVI.     Figure 1. a. An example scene from our field site seen in visible light. b. False color image product from the instrument after processing. Processed image has been decorrelation stretched where red, green, and blue were assigned to wavelengths 11.3, 9.1, and 8.6 µm.  Figure 2. Spectral variability observed in the basaltic sediments and coated basalt from the scene in Figure 1. Representative emissivity spectra for each category are averaged.  1953.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
