1963.PDF
Reinvestigation  of  the  Robustness  of  Martian  Paleopole  Reconstructions. P.  Thomas1,  M.  Grott2,  and  A. Morschhauser³ 1,2Department of Planetary Physics, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Rutherfordstr. 2, 12489 Berlin,  1paul.thomas@dlr.de,  2matthias.grott@dlr.de, ³GFZ, German Research Center for Geosciences, Potsdam, Germany, morsch@gfz-potsdam.de.Introduction: The investigation of a planets paleopole positions can reveal informations regarding events like polar wander or pole reversals and therefore can help to understand a planets past [1,2,3,4]. One of the issues associated with many of these studies is the difficulty to  give proper  confidence intervals  for  the obtained paleopole positions,  and only the best  fits  are usually reported. Here we present a method to self consistently  calculate  the  best  fit  paleopole  position  together with its associated standard deviation and compare our results to those given in the literature. Paleopoles are calculated for the two volcanoes Apollinaris Patera  and  Australe  Montes  which  have  previously been studied by [2] and [4], respectively. Furthermore, we will investigate how the choice of the considered area influences the results. Method: We applied the method of [5] to calculate paleopole positions in the study area. A number of  N dipoles is distributed over the magnetic anomaly and the resulting magnetic field is calculated using a forward model  similar  to  the Equivalent  Source  Dipole method (ESD) and compared  to  the magnetic  model field of [6]. In the calculation, a fixed orientation for all  N dipoles is assumed, which implies that the magnetization has been acquired during a phase of a constant main magnetic field [5]. This calculation is then repeated for different magnetization directions, and the misfits for these magnetization directions are obtained, and can then be statistically analyzed. As has been shown by [5] it is sufficient to consider N observation points if  N dipoles are used in the forward model. The dipoles should be equally distributed across the magnetic anomaly and for this purpose we chose a hexagonal grid. Furthermore the mean distance between the distributed dipoles is commonly taken to be equal to the observation altitude [2]. However we will also study the influence of different dipole distributions on the results. In total, we tested configurations with 7, 19 61 and 229 dipoles using spherical caps as observation areas with radii of 3°, 6°, 12° and 25° as measured from the center  of the anomaly on surface height. To obtain the optimal magnetization direction 32400 forward models were calculated, one for every magnetization  direction.  The  paleopole  position  can then be calculated from the magnetization vector using a coordinate transformation [7] that takes the location of the anomaly into account. In the transformation it is implicitly assumed that mars possessed an interior field with purely dipolar character in the past.      Fig. 1. Results of the paleopole reconstruction of Australe Montes (80° S, 25°E). Color coded contour lines  plotted  on  a  MOLA  shaded  relief  represent  misfit  between lithospheric magnetic  field data and model.  The  green  symbol  represents  the  best  fit  (magnetic  south)  paleopole  position  obtained  in  the  inversion.  Red represents the mean paleopole position obtained  using  different  dipole  distributions.  The  mean  result  obtained by [4] is given as a reference (blue). a) and  b)  show stereographic  projections  of  the  north  and  south pole,  respectively,  while c) is a global map in  Robinson projection.In order to compare the forward models to Martian magnetic field data we use the model of [6] which is based on the entire Mars Global Surveyor data set. The model uses spherical harmonic functions up to degree and order  110 to approximate the measurements and uses a modified Huber-norm to address data outliers. The model has a low noise level and is robust when downward continued to the surface.Results: The applied method has been verified using synthetic  magnetic  field  data  with known dipole distributions, orientations, and magnetization strengths. Inverted  dipole  orientations  perfectly  reproduce  the prescribed  orientations  and  magnetization  strengths. Number of dipoles and the extend of the observation area do not have any influence on the inversion. This is due to the fact that in the synthetic data all orientations 1963.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
are uniformly aligned and that no perturbations due to surrounding fields are present. Results of the calculation for the inversion of the Australe Montes magnetic anomaly [4] are presented in Fig. 1, where a contour plot of the color coded misfit between calculated and model of the observed field is shown as a function of paleopole location. The green symbol represents the best fit (magnetic south) paleopole position obtained in the inversion, using the first listed configuration in Tab. 1, with a dipole distribution centered at 80°S / 25°E. Red represents the mean paleopole  position  obtained  from all  calculated  dipole distributions. The results obtained by [4] are given as a reference (blue). Note that [4] uses paleopole positions representing  magnetic  north,  while  magnetic  south poles are determined here [7].Contour lines around the anomalies center shown in Fig. 1 are roughly concentric with respect to the best fit, which has a minimum average misfit of 1.82 nT and is located at 6°E / 38°S. As already pointed out by [5], the problem now consists of defining a value for the acceptable misfit range, and in principle the uncertainty of the used magnetic field data should be used to derive this value. This can be done by analyzing the covariance matrix of the gauss coefficients of the applied lithospheric magnetic field model [6]. But this has not been implemented at this stage. Arbitrarily choosing a factor of 1.6 for the misfit as the confidence limit for illustration purposes results in a reconstructed paleopole position between 10°W / 25°E and 25°S / 70°S, which is close to the mean paleopole position of 27°E / 48°S determined by [4]. Results for different configurations of dipole distributions and observation radii are summarized in Tab. 1 for the inversion of the Australe Montes anomaly. Results are consistent irrespective of the chosen number of dipoles, and spatially better resolved models appear to give  less  scattered  results.  This  is  also  evident  from Fig.  1  where the average  best  fit  position  across  all geometric configurations is close to the overall best fitting result.This is in contrast to the results we obtained for the Apollinaris  Patera  magnetic  anomaly,  which strongly depend on the spatial extend of the study region (compare Tab. 1). This is attributed to the fact that Apollinaris Patera itself is located within a region of strong remanent magnetic  fields.  Choosing large  radii  for  the ESD inversion then results in fitting part  of  this unwanted  signal,  therefore  the  results  obtained  by  [2] could only be reproduced for paleopoles located at the northern hemisphere, with an assumed radial extend of the investigated area of 3°. A further evaluation of the results is necessary.Conclusions:  We have presented a method for reconstructing the position of Martian paleopoles which allows for  an  estimation  of  the  position  uncertainty. The method has been validated using synthetic magnetic field data.  Furthermore results obtained previously for the paleopole directions of the Apollinaris Patera [2] and Australe Montes [4] magnetic anomalies have been reproduced.  We have shown that  robust  results are obtained if either the studied anomaly is well isolated from surrounding fields, or if the study radius is chosen appropriately. In this regard it is promising to investigate the isolated anomalies identified by [6], as these can be expected to yield robust paleopole locations. In order to better quantify the uncertainty of the obtained  paleopole  locations,  the  uncertainty  associated with the available magnetic field data needs to be taken into account. In addition we will invert the model for different observation heights with direct investigation of the Martian magnetic surface field which is possible due to the use of the model of [6].Table 1: Compilation of selected results for different spatial configurations of the ESD's in terms of  ESD number, ESD distribution, and observation radius.Number of Dip.  Distribution radiusObserv. radiusPaleopole LocationAustrale Montes7191961613°3°6°3°6°5°6°9°3°9°6°E / 38°S14°E / 39°S4°E / 38°S21°E /  30°S10°E /  34°SMean result from [4] 27°E / 48°SApollinaris Patera776122922933123253612325143°W / 67°N171°E / 7°S89°E / 82°S155°W / 76°N107°E / 51°NReferences: [1] Parker  R.L.  (2003)  J.  Geophys.  Res.,  108. [2] Langlais  et  al.  (2007)  Plan.  Space  Sci.,  55, 270279. [3] Milbury et al. (2012)  J. Geophys. Res., 117,  E10007.  [4]  Plattner  et  al.  (2015)  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets,  120,  1543-1566.  [5]  Parker  R.L.  (1991)  J.  Geophys. Res., 96, 16/110-16/112. [6] Morschhauser et al.  (2014)  J.  Geophys.  Res.  Planets,  119(6),  11621188. [7] Butler R.F. (1992) Blackwell Sci., 121-135.1963.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
