1969.PDF
Trace elements in meteorite fusion crust.  K. P. Hewson1 and G. K. Benedix1,2, P. A. Bland1,2, M. Roberts3, N. Evans1, B. McDonald1,1Dept. Applied Geology, Curtin University GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA, 6845 Australia (kaitlin.hewson@student.curtin.edu.au), 2Western Australian Museum, Locked Bag 49, Welshpool, WA, 6986, Australia (g.benedix@curtin.edu.au) 3Centre for Microscopy Characterisation and Analysis, The University of Western Australia M010 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, WA, 6009 Australia (malc.roberts@uwa.edu.au)  Introduction:  Meteorites have a glassy outer rind or ‘fusion crust’ on their exterior surface as a result of ablation during atmospheric entry [1]. The composition of this fusion crust has been shown to be the bulk chemistry of the meteorite minus highly volatile material that was lost in the ablative processes [2]. Previous studies have looked at the glassy outer crust and an inner ‘substrate’ region between the fusion crust and the unaffected meteorite [1,2,3,4]. There is only one study to assess the depth to which a meteorite has been altered by atmospheric processing. This study utilized magnetic screening and did not correlate with chemical or textural variations [5]. Alteration is evident 6mm into the Murchison chondrite due to the drastic change in NRM to that of the unaltered meteorite. In this project, which was an honours project for a bachelor’s degree, we analysed the major, minor and trace elements of fusion crust and outer few millimetres in thin sections (thus retaining the spatial relationship of the fusion crust to the rest of the meteorite) of four samples.  Samples and Analytical Methods: The samples were chosen to examine how different starting compositions are affected and based on availability of currently held samples with intact fusion crust. Four samples were chosen: Bunburra Rock-hole (BR), an anomalous basaltic achondrite; North West Africa (NWA) 1463, a winonaite; Bells, initially classified as a CM2, but now designated a C2-ungrouped chondrite; and Cold Bokkeveld (CB), a CM2 chondrite.Three of these are falls and one of those has an orbit (BR; [6]).  Major and minor element abundances were measured with a JEOL 8530F hyperprobe at the University of Western Australia Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation, and Analysis (CMCA). Samples were analysed with both a fully focused and a 10µm beam spot. All analyses were carried out with a beam current of 20 nA. Seven traverses and spot analysis of 19 points were cho-sen and analysed. The analysis involved a 10 micron beam and points were chosen to parallel laser holes in an attempt to gain more accurate analyses of the laser points. In response to previous studies on the Murchison chondrite [5], a 6mm traverse into the unaltered meteorite of NWA 1463 was done. Quantitative element and backscatter electron (BSE) maps were produced using Surfer™ by Golden Software Inc. Trace element abundances were determined using the Laser Ablation – Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) system at at the John de Laeter Centre at Curtin University. Two sessions were undertaken: in June and September of 2015. Spots (sizes varied from 50 to 193µm) were ablated for 35 seconds for an energy at the sample surface of 23Jcm-2. Larger spot analyses were utilized in the September session in order to homogenize and provide average trace element abundances of each region. 48 elements were measured in traverse across each meteorites fusion crust and into the interior meteorite. The data was reduced using Iolite™ software on Igor Pro and used Fe and Si abundances from EPMA data was used to calibrate the LA-ICP-MS data. The data were subsequently normalised to chondritic values [7]. Results and Discussion: We studied the textural and chemical variation across across the fusion crust and into the unaltered meteorite. Texture analysis The texture and thickness of the fusion crust and substrate varies across the samples (Fig. 1). BR’s fusion crust looks different to the crusts of the other three samples due to it being an achondrite. It is entirely glassy, giving it a distinctly smooth appearance. Bells and CB have unmelted relic silicate and metal grains in their fusion crusts. NWA has a fusion crust that looks more similar to the chondrites than to BR. The ‘substrate’ is a region in contact with the fusion crust that shows morphological evidence of having experienced heat – more of a melty lookin texture than the interior, but not the fully glassy texture of the fusion crusts. In our samples, we can see (fig. 1) evidence of the substrate in all but NWA. These textures are consistent with those reported by previous studies [1,2,4,8]. There is no textural evidence of melting 6mm into the NWA as studies indicated [5]. Based on texture alone, NWA does not have a substrate. There is no textural evidence of heating further than the substrate in any of the samples. Major elements Al/Si versus Mg/Si plots for fusion crust (FC), substrate (S) and interior meteorite (IM) allow us to distinguish the different samples, based on level of differentiation – both the starting composition and the effect of heating during atmospheric entry (Fig. 2). The fusion crust data points cluster in a similar manner to the interior meteorite in most samples. The substrate is where the main variation is noted. Three of CB’s substrate points plot at 0-0.2 Al/Si, while four plot up around 1.8-2 Al/Si. These elevated Al/Si ratio points can be accounted for by the large CAI that is 1969.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
present in the substrate of the sample area. The variability of the ratios in the substrates of Bells and NWA are likely due to the presence of relic grains. Chemical variation across each sample was compared to data from previous studies, especially in the case of CB which is one sample that overlapped between the two studies [1]. Our results are a bit different to those of [1], most likely due to sample heterogeneity, differences in probe locations and methodology. Trace elements Fig. 3 shows selected trace elements, normalized to CI chondrite, for the four meteorites. Bells has an array of refractory elements enriched in the substrate and volatiles and refractory elements enriched in the crust as studies predicted [1]. CB’s substrate is similar to the interior meteorite, while the crust has variable abundances of volatile and refractory elements. NWA’s melted crust is generally enriched relative to the substrate and interior meteorite. Trace element analyses across the 6mm long traverse in NWA did not indicate heating that far into the sample. Refractory elements such as Fe, Al, Mg, as well as the moderately volatile Mn and Na show an identical pattern in BR. All five elements are significantly depleted in the substrate and fusion crust relative to the interior meteorite. This is consistent with the fact that BR is a basalt, and thus has already melted. Our textural and chemical results indicate that only the fusion crust and substrate of the meteorite have been affected significantly by temperature during atmospheric entry. The starting composition of the meteorites control what the final fusion crust looks like. The substrate is where the temperature gradient is evident, in the form of a ‘smooshed’ morphology as well as in bulk chemistry.  Although our sample size is small, this preliminary work shows that the bulk composition of the meteorite controls what the fusion crust looks like, as well as how far into the meteorite the heat of entry might extend. Future work will expand the sample set.       References:  [1] Genge M. J. and Grady M. M. (1999). MAPS, 34, 341-356. [2] Thaisen K. G. and Taylor L. A. (2009). MAPS, 44, 871-878. [3] Brack A., et al. (2002). Planet. and Space Sci., 50, 763-772. [4] Horstmann M., et al. (2013). MAPS, 48, 730-743. [5] Kohout T., et al. (2004). Phys. & Chem. Earth, 29, 885-897. [6] Bland P. A. et al. (2009) Science, 325, 1525. [7] McDonough W. F. and Sun S. S. (1995). Chem. Geol., 120, 223-253. [8] Lenart A., et al. (2010). Geologija, 5, 139-145.             Fig. 1. BSE images of the four meteorites (labelled in figure). Fusion crust is indicated by arrows. Fig. 2 Al/Si vs Mg/Si. Shows the difference for each meteorite, which is consistent with starting material. Square points are fusion crust, triangles are substrate and circles are interior meteorite. Fig. 3 Trace element abundances normalized to CI values [7]. 1969.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
