2030.PDF
Uncommon Diogenitic Troilite-Orthopyroxene Melt Texture: 2-Phase Symplectite Found in Diogenite NWA 10451  S. A. Eckley1, H. Y. McSween Jr.1 , and L. A. Taylor1, T. M. Hahn1, 1Planetary Geosciences Institute, Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA (seckley@vols.utk.edu),    Introduction:  The desire to understand the processes of terrestrial planet evolution, from planetesimal accretion to post-formation alteration, is of paramount importance in planetary sciences. Fortunately, the asteroid belt provides us opportunities to study these early building blocks of the Solar System. Remnants of proto-planets, some iron-nickel bodies, and mostly stony asteroids comprise the Asteroid Belt. However, the asteroid 4 Vesta, titled the “smallest terrestrial planet,” [1] ranks as the second most massive object in the asteroid belt with a mean diameter of 525 km [1]. Remote sensing and physical data show that this is a differentiated body with a composition similar to the terrestrial planets [2]. Composed of a basaltic crust, ultramafic mantle, and iron-nickel core, Vesta has been assumed to be the parent body of the largest collection of achondritic meteorites. They are believed to have originated from a large impact crater on Vesta’s south pole that ejected particles into Earth-crossing resonances [1].  Fortunately, this HED (Howardite-EucriteDiogenite) group of meteorites provides a window into the mineral and chemical composition of an intact, differentiated body.  Diogenites will be the focus of this paper and provide a less-altered, more-controlled sample of Vesta, because they formed at depths too deep for surficial alteration. Analysis of these orthopyroxenitic meteorites can help constrain the processes that created Vesta and help craft more accurate models of planetary formation.  Specifically, sample NWA 10451 is important because it has an average diogenite composition with an unusual 2-phase symplectite. Most opx-troilite symplectites are restricted to harzburgitic lithologies [3]. However, NWA 10451 is an orthpyroxenite, defying the assumption that 2-phase symplectites are only found in harzburgitic diogenites. This paper will characterize the petrological and mineralogical composition of diogenite NWA 10451.   NWA 10451  : This sample has overall homogeneity with orthopyroxene comprising >95 % of the phases and olivine, plagioclase, and other accessory minerals comprising <5 %. It is a highly fractured, orthopyroxenitic, monomict diogenite. The overall meteorite has a phaneritic texture with orthopyroxene phenocrysts. They range from 1 to 5 mm in length and are surrounded by a finer groundmass of orthopyroxene and   Table 1: Modal mineralogy of NWA 10451 obtained from ENVI image analysis Mineral                           Percentage Opx 95.7 Cpx 0.4 Olivine 0.9 FeNi 0.2 Plagioclase 2.4 Sulfide 0.4 Chromite 0.1 sparsely scattered, interstitial clinopyroxene and plagioclase. Some of the once-larger crystals appear to be groundmass, but are actually heavily fractured, continuous grains because of their identical optical orientations. The intact crystals are euhedral to subhedral but share no grain boundaries with any of the other remaining crystals.  The largest orthopyroxene is about 4.5 mm long by 2.5 mm wide. It has no zoning or exsolution. It has two orthogonal fractures running throughout the crystal and has a perfect crystal shape. Secondary- mineral melt inclusions (merrilite and Kfeldspar) are situated in the center of this crystal. They are ~10 microns long and are only located in this area of the sample.  The opaque minerals are troilite (FeS) and FeNi metals and comprise <2 %. They exist as both inclusions and interstitial grains in the finer groundmass. Olivine exists as both phenocrysts and as interstitial groundmass grains and comprises about 1%. The rare, diogenitc-derived 2-phase symplectite has a vermicular melt texture composed of troilite and orthopyroxene. Relict olivine exists in the middle and interstitially on the boundary of the melt feature. This melt texture has only been found in one other diogenite and has been the focus of this research.   Figure 1: BSE image of 2-phase symplectite. 2030.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Mineralogy:  Two distinct pyroxene compositions are present; Low-Ca pyroxene and the less than 0.5% abundant high-Ca pyroxene. Their Mg# ((molar Mg/[molar Mg+molar Fe])*100) are 74 and 79, respectively. The pyroxene quadrilateral shows that there are no exsolution textures and that nearly all data lie within the range of known diogenite OPX compostions. The high-Ca pyroxenes exist as interstitial, random crystals and are never seen exsolved from low-Ca pyroxene.   Figure 2: Pyroxene quadrilateral with NWA 10451 data overlaying existing diogenite data.  2-phase symplectite.  The only outstanding feature is a prominent grain boundary symplectite that is about 2 mm by 2 mm in size. It has the classic composition of 2-phase symplectites with a larger, relict olivine surrounded by a “blebby” texture of troilite and OPX . Accessory chromite, plagioclase, and olivine exist in the vermicular melt texture, but as minor constituents. Two-phase symplectites are commonly found in howardites, but rarely found in diogenites. Since howardites are the amalgamation of all material on Vesta, the origin of 2-phase symplectites has been difficult to determine. However, they are hypothesized to be of diogenite origin, but limited diogenitic 2-phase symplectites have been found [3]. This sample is similar to the other diogenitic 2-phase symplectite, LEW 88679,8, with a more magnesian vermicular Opx than the surrounding Opx (Mg#: 76 vs 73). The olivine are identical to the surrounding olivine and seemed to have not been affected by this alteration event. The exact cause of formation of 2-phase symplectites is unknown, but [4] provide three possible causes of symplectite formation: partial melting occurred, the melt migrated and was trapped at grain boundaries; small amounts of melt were produced along grain boundaries as a result of impact; or sulfidization reactions between S-rich fluid or gas and primary olivine produced the OPX-sulfide symplectites. Exact determination of the cause of formation is difficult, but, the impact model seems the most plausible. High-velocity impacts were needed to excavate diogenites from depths greater than 30 km. These impacts would have provided the necessary heat to cause melting and rapid, subsequent cooling of an olivine-troilite-orthopyroxene assemblage. The presence of a 2-phase symplectite in diogenite NWA 10451 is special because it helps solidify the hypothesis that howarditic 2-phase symplectites originated in diogenites.  Figure 3: X-ray map of sulfur and silicon in 2-phase symplectite.  Summary: Diogenite NWA 10451  is a monomict breccia composed of orthopyroxene with < 5 % accessory minerals (plagioclase, olivine, clinopyroxene, troilite, chromite). It contains a unique diogenitic 2phase symplectite that is rarely found in orthopyroxenitic diogenites. The study of this meteorite helps to continue the investigation of planetesimal formation and add to the knowledge of 4 Vesta. References: [1] Keil K. (2002) Asteroids III,  573. [2] McCord, T. B., Adams, J. B. and Johnson, T. V., (1970) Science, 168, 1445-144. [3] Patzer, A. and McSween Jr. H. Y. (2012) Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 47, 1475-1490. [4] Singerling, S.A. (2012) Studies of regolithic Vestan samples: Brecciated eucrites and howardites. M.S. Thesis, University of Tennessee.    2030.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
