2042.PDF
SPACE WEATHERING INDUCED SLOPE CHANGES IN PYROXENE AND HOWARDITEREFLECTANCE SPECTRA.  T.  Kohout1,  2, O. Malina3, A. Penttilä1, A. Kröger1, D. Britt4, J. Filip3, K. Muinonen1,5, R. Zbořil3, 1Department of Physics, University of Helsinki, Finland (tomas.kohout@helsinki.fi), 2Instituteof Geology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Departments of Physical Chemistry and Experimental Physics, Palacky University Olomouc,Czech Republic, 4Department of Physics,  University of Central  Florida,  USA, 5Finnish Geospatial Research Institute, Masala, Finland.Introduction:  The major reason for spectralchanges in lunar-type space weathering is productionof nanophase iron (npFe0) in the lunar regolith. Thespectral changes include attenuation of silicate absorption bands, darkening, and slope change (reddening).Observations of the asteroid Vesta recently visited byDAWN mission revealed a different pattern of spectralchanges (e.g. [1]). The darkening and the absorptionband attenuation occur in similar way as on the Moon.The  reddening,  however,  is  not  apparent.  Thus,  isspace weathering on Vesta distinct from that we seeon the Moon? Or is another mechanism, such as theaddition of carbonaceous darkening material responsible for spectral darkening of Vesta?Space weathering experiments with pyroxeneand howardite:  In order to study effects of npFe0 onreflectance spectra a pyroxene (En 90) and howardite(NWA 1929) powder samples were subjected to thespace weathering experiments using the doubleheating method described in [2]. The aim of the experiments is to produce the npFe0 on the silicate mineral grains with control of their concentration and sizeand to quantify related spectral changes.Reflectance spectra:  Both enstatite and howardite  show  progressive  changes  in  their  spectra  as  afunction of the increasing npFe0 amount (Fig. 1). Ingeneral, pyroxene is more resistant to space weathering  than  olivine  (e.g.  [3])  what  is  also  seen  in  oursimulations. Higher heating temperatures are neededto produce the same amount of npFe0 than in the olivine [2] case.This quantitative comparison confirmed a trendobserved earlier in olivine where spectral parameterschange with logarithm of the [2].An interesting feature was observed in the comparisonof the slope over the 1 and 2 µm bands in both pyroxene and howardite. While the slope over 2 µm bandshow progressive reddening with increasing npFe0amount (similarly to olivine), the situation is reversedin 1 µm band region (Fig. 1). The relative reduction inred slope is observed in this region.This is due to the fact that the decrease in reflectance when adding npFe0 is a nonlinear process wherehigher reflectance values will decrease more than lower values. If the original slope is positive, as the slopeover the 1 µm band in pyroxene and howardite, theslope will decrease with increasing npFe0, and viceversa. In addition, the npFe0 has a small positive slopeitself in the VIS-NIR range, and that will turn originally zero slopes in the host mineral into positiveslopes when adding npFe0.This finding can potentially explain some of thespace weathering observations for Vesta. The majorityof DAWN observations were done in the 1 µm regionwhere lack of reddening is observed, similar to ourpyroxene and howardite results.Conclusions:  Based on our space weathering laboratory results the lack of reddening over 1 µm region as observed on Vesta does not contradict thespace weathering mechanism driven by the presenceof npFe0. In order to confirm this more NIR data fromVesta are needed over the 2 µm region where our experiments predict progressive reddening.References:[1] Reddy V. et al. (2012) Science 336, 700-704[2] Kohout T. et al. (2014) Icarus, 237, 75-83. [3]Quadery A. et al (2015) JGR-Planets 120, 1-19.2042.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Fig. 1. Normalized reflectance spectra and slope change of pyroxene and howardite as a funnction of npFe0.IncreasingnpFe 0amount2042.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
