2060.PDF
GLOBAL TECTONICS OF ENCELADUS: NUMERICAL MODEL. Leszek Czechowski University of Warsaw, Faculty of Physics, Institute of Geophysics, ul. Pasteura 7,02-093Poland (lczech@op.pl/Fax: +48-22-5546882)Introduction:  Enceladus, a satellite of Saturn, is the smallest celestial body in the Solar System where  volcanic  and  tectonic  activities  are  observed.  Every  second,  the  mass  of  ~200  kg  is ejected into space from the South Polar  Terrain (SPT) - [1]. The loss of matter from the body's interior  should lead  to  global  compression of  the crust.  Typical  effects  of compression are: thrust faults,  folding  and  subduction.  However,  such forms are not dominant on Enceladus. We propose here  special  tectonic  process  that  could  explain this paradox. Our hypotheses states that the mass loss from SPT is the main driving mechanism of the  following  tectonic  processes:  subsidence  of SPT,  flow in the mantle and motion of adjacent tectonic plates. The hypotheses is presented in  [2], [3] and[4]. We suggest that  the loss of the volatiles results in a void, an instability, and motion of solid matter to fill the void. The motion is presented  at the Fig.1 and includes:(i) Subsidence of the 'lithosphere' of SPT.(ii) Flow of the matter in the mantle. (iii) Motion of plates adjacent to SPT towards the active region Methods  and  results:  The  numerical  model  of processes presented in Fig.  1  is  developed. It  is based on the equations of continuous media.. If emerging void is being filled by the subsidence of SPT  only, then the velocity of subsidence is ~0.05 mm·yr-1.  However, numerical calculations indicate that all three types of motion are usually important. The role of a given motion depends on the viscosity distribution. Generally, for most of the models the subsidence is ~0.02 mm·yr1, but mantle flow and plates' motion also play a role in filling the void. The preliminary results of the numerical model indicate also that the velocity of  adjacent plates could be ~0.02 mm·yr-1 for the Newtonian rheology.Note that in our model the reduction of the crust area is not a result of compression but it is a result of the plate sinking. Therefore the compressional surface features do not have to be dominant. The SPT does not have to be compressed, so the open "tiger stripes" could exist for long time. Only after significant subsidence (even for 1200 m) the regime of stresses changes for compressional. We suppose that it means the end of activity in the given region.Fig. 1. The scheme of proposed motion (based on the [2])Experimental model is also developed to investigate the surface effects of the subsidence.Acknowledgement: The research  is partly supported by  National  Science  Centre  (grant 2011/01/B/ST10/06653). References[1] Spencer, J. R.,  et al.  Enceladus: An Active Cryovolcanic  Satellite,  in:  M.K.  Dougherty  et  al.  (eds.), Saturn  from  Cassini-Huygens,  Springer  Science, (2009), p. 683. [2] Czechowski, L., Enceladus - the vanishing satellite presenting in EGU 2014, Vienna.[3] Czechowski Leszek Mass loss as a driving mechanism of tectonics of Enceladus 46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015)
 2030.pdf
[4] Czechowski, L., Some remarks on the early evolution  of  Enceladus.  Planet.  Sp.  Sc.  104,  185-199 (2014).2060.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
