2073.PDF
PLANETARY SURFACE DATING FROM CRATER SIZE-FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION MEASUREMENTS: POISSON TIMING ANALYSIS  G.G. Michael, T. Kneissl, A. Neesemann. Planetary Sciences and Remote Sensing, Institute of Geological Sciences, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Malteser Strasse 74-100, Haus D, Berlin 12249, Germany.   Introduction:  The predictions of crater chronology models have customarily been evaluated by dividing a crater population into discrete diameter intervals, plotting the crater density for each, and finding a best-fit model isochron. The uncertainty in the procedure has been assessed using 1/√n estimates [1], where n is the number of craters. This approach yields only an approximate estimate of the model predictions, the approximation being good until n becomes small. Different variants of this approach yield slightly different results [2] because of the way the approximations are compounded. This presentation will outline an approach for exact analysis within a crater chronology model using Poisson statistics, expressing the result as a probability density function (PDF) with an intrinsic uncertainty, providing better quality estimates for low-n measurements [3].  Discussion: The Poisson statistics method results in measurement values close to those of the previous binning/best-fit approaches, either cumulative or differential, when the number of craters is large. Figure 1 shows measurements taken from a synthesised dataset, constructed with a Monte Carlo simulation to represent an ideal surface of 1 Ga in age, using three approaches: fitting with a cumulative production function, fitting with a differential production function, and using the Poisson calculation, each applied for three intervals illustrating a) large-n, b) mid-range n, and c) small n.  For large n, there appears to be no systematic advantage in the use of one method over another, although the differential error margin is indicated larger. At medium n, the spread of values increases as does the fractional error margin. Note that the measured values vary over repeated population syntheses, with the variation being of the order of the quoted errors. For small n, the spread is greatest: here we deliberately consider a measurement from only two craters to maximise the effect. For the Poisson calculation it is important to be more careful about the selection of the diameter interval: it is not only the largest and smallest craters which are significant, but also any empty interval where craters would have been observed had they been present: this typically extends beyond the largest observed crater. Indeed, this was a shortfall of previous approaches, since the absence of craters also carries information about the surface age. We note that the shape of the PDF is no longer symmetrical as is implicitly assumed when using 1/√n as the estimate of error.  Figure 1. Measured ages of synthesised crater population for a 1 Ga surface obtained by fitting of cumulative production function (red), by fitting of differential production function (blue), and by Poisson calculation (black, with PDF), for diameter intervals of a) 50–180 m, b) 200–350 m and c) 350–450 m (350–800 m for Poisson calculation). The measured values vary for repeated population syntheses, with the variation on the order of the quoted errors. The Poisson calculated ages are accompanied by a plot of the uncertainty as a probability density function, marked with vertical lines at the 50 and 50±34 percentiles.  μ-notation: Most crater-dating studies are careful to indicate that their given ages are crater model ages or absolute model ages (AMAs), meaning that the values should be interpreted within the context of a specific chronology model with its own uncertainties, which must be compounded together with the statistical errors. It has been suggested that confusion remains because the numbers are frequently dissociated from this clarification. We propose a new notation for the representation of crater model ages, intended to serve as an inseparable reminder that the quoted statistical errors are not the end of the story. Namely, to write a model age in the form 𝜇𝑡, e.g. 𝜇1.0−0.02+0.02 Ga, where the 𝜇-term represents the compounded uncertainties of the particular chronology model. 𝜇 is the presently unknown function of 𝑡 which maps a given chronology model’s ages onto true ages.  2073.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
The age of an uncratered surface: A natural consequence of the Poisson analysis approach is the possibility to estimate the age of a surface from an image showing no observable craters at all. The PDF evaluates to a decaying function of 𝑡, with the rate of fall-off being determined by the image’s threshold for resolving small craters.    Figure 2. (a) Maricourt Crater on Mars, seen in HRSC image h1440_0000 with mapped ejecta unit (dashed line) and smooth-textured sub-unit selected for crater counting (solid line) (b) Poisson timing analysis for zero observed craters, assuming a crater identification threshold of 5 (black), 10 (red) and 15 (blue) pixels before image projection: local HRSC ground sampling distance was 16.7m, corresponding to crater diameter thresholds of 84m, 167m, and 251m respectively. μ is a function representing the uncertainty of calibration of the chronology model. Figure 2a shows a Mars Express HRSC image [4] of Maricourt Crater with a mapped region of its smooth continuous ejecta which might be used to date it. However, the image reveals no craters on the unit.  Figure 2b shows a Poisson timing analysis for three estimates of the threshold for being able to identify all craters of the size: 5 pixels (blue) – which we consider to be too low – corresponding to 83m, 10 pixels (red) and 15 pixels (blue), corresponding to 167 and 251m. The inset PDFs are shown together with the median and 50±34 percentiles. All indicate that the most probable age (the mode) of the unit is zero; nevertheless, among an uncorrelated collection of similar units, half would be expected to be older than the given median, and 68% to fall within the stated error margin. In this case, for the 10-pixel threshold, we find an expected median age of 𝜇11.3−8.0+19  Ma. The top limit is straightforward to interpret: there is only a 16% chance this unit is older than 30 Ma. The lower limit works the same way but is perhaps better understood in terms of the uncorrelated collection of similar units: only 16% would be younger than 3 Ma.  Conclusion: The Poisson statistics evaluation of a chronology model prediction should be considered superior to results obtained by binning and fitting: it is the exact prediction of the model, whilst binning and fitting merely yield approximations to this result. Binned plots remain useful to interpret influences on the crater population which are external to the chronology model, e.g. the resolution fall-off, resurfacing effects, or contamination of the counts by secondary craters or other surface features.  A more detailed exposition is given in [3].  Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the German Space Agency (DLR Bonn), grants 50QM1301 (HRSC on Mars Express) and 50OW1101 (Dawn), on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy.  References: [1] Arvidson, R.E. et al., 1979. Standard techniques for presentation and analysis of crater size-frequency data. Icarus 37, 467–474. [2] Chapman, C.R., 2015. A Critique of Methods for Analysis of Crater Size-Frequency Distributions, in: Issues in Crater Studies and the Dating of Planetary Surfaces, LPI Contributions 1841, p. 9039. [3] Michael, G.G., Kneissl, T., Neesemann,  A. Planetary surface dating from crater size-frequency distribution measurements: Poisson timing analysis (Submitted to Icarus, 2016). [4] Neukum, G., Jaumann, R., 2004. HRSC: the High Resolution Stereo Camera of Mars Express, in: Wilson, A., Chicarro, A. (Eds.), Mars Express Scientific Payload, ESA Special Publication. pp. 17–35.    2073.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
