2117.PDF
SCIENCE OVERVIEW FOR THE 2015 CANMARS MSR ANALOGUE MISSION: THE EVOLUTION FROM PRE-MISSION HYPOTHESES TO IN-SITU SCIENCE. A. Pontefract1,2, L.L. Tornabene1,2, T. Haltigin3, M.C. Kerrigan1,2, S. Duff1,2, N. Barry1,2 and G.R. Osinski1,2,4. 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5B7, apontefr@uwo.ca. 2Department of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5B7. 3Canadian Space Agency, 6767 Route De L'aéroport, St-Hubert, Quebec J3Y 8Y9. 4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7.   Introduction:  Orbital datasets are an integral and important part of planetary exploration missions. This mission-critical data provides broad regional context for the geology and chemistry of an area and serves as important precursor data for rover-based exploration, allowing us to address aspects from landing site safety and engineering constraints to pre-misison science. This commonly includes the definition of mission objectives, general hypotheses formulation testing and traverse planning. The CanMars mission was a simulated Mars sample return mission carried out in partnership between the Canadian Space Agency, MacDonald Dettwiler and Associates Ltd., and the Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX) at the University of Western Ontario, as part of the NSERC CREATE project “Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration” (create.uwo.ca). This mission represents the highest-fidelity analogue mission conducted in Canada to-date (see [1] for a complete mission overview). Here we present the scientific overview for the 2015 CanMars mission as it evolved from pre-mission science, derived from orbital datasets, to testable scientific hypotheses addressed through in situ science data products. Pre-Mission Science: The Science Team was provided with a set of regional and landing site-specific data including: multispectral visible to thermal infrared Landsat OLI (15-60m/pixel) (Fig. 1a) and ASTER (1590m/pixel datasets (Fig. 1b), a 60cm/pixel visible to nearinfrared WorldView image (Fig. 2) and a 10 m/pixel digital elevation model (DEM). In addition, the team was provided with mission goals: 1) to collect a minimum of one sample, and 2) satisify two sub-goals from the MEPAG objectives for Goals I and III; Habitability and Crustal Processes, respectively [2]. The Science Team was restricted from knowing the location of the site and no other specific data was provided to them; however, general information on the geology of Utah was admissible.  Based on these data sets and the generalized geology of Utah, the team proposed that the region was the result of extensional tectonics resulting in the formation of horst and graben features. This would explain the presence of what was suggested to be a domed, antiform feature (see left half of Figs. 1a, 1b), as well as a basin-like area in which the landing ellipse is located. Interpretations on a local-scale suggested that the landing ellipse may occur within a sedimentary basin, which includes sinuous ridges proposed to be inverted topography (possibly paleochannels) preserved through the deposition of an erosionresistant cap rock.  The high-resolution imagery revealed a blocky, boulder-forming caprock atop the escarpment (east – Fig. 2a) and in several areas within the landing ellipse – most notably atop a sinuous ridge referred to by the team as the “smiley-face” feature (Fig. 2b). This surface appears blocky, and to be eroding in block shaped boulders. The caprock unit is grey/brown in true colour, and blue/red in landsat data. Based on the orbital data, the science team was unable to make a determination as to the composition of the “capping unit”; however, the “smiley-face feature” was thought to represent an inverted channel, commonly created due to the infilling of an eroded channel by magmatic processes or through the cementation of fluvial deposits. This process provides a less-erodible cap which helps to preserve the lower, softer, unit – termed the Bifrost formation. The blocky nature of the capping unit, especially along the eroding front of the unit indicated that the capping unit may be volcanic. In-Mission Science: The rover deployment in Utah occurred over 11 Sols, and the team was able to traverse a total distance of 234m and collect four samples (3 rock samples and 1 regolith). The landing site was located in the north-east quadrant of the landing ellipse and operations consisted of sampling in the immediate area and at the closest outcrop – Jotenheim (Fig. 3). On-theground panoramas revealed the presence of more poFigure 1. (a) Left, Landsat OLI band ratio color composite (R:4/2, G:5/4, B:6/7), where red represents oxidized iron, green = vegetation, and blue = carbonate, sulfates and/or clays. Red arrow indicates “smiley-face” feature within landing ellipse for context. (b) Right, a 90m ASTER TIR emissivity colour composite (R:10, G:11 and B:12), where Magenta = gypsum, Black = silica rich + carbonates, and Yellow = phylosilicates. The landing ellipse is shown in black and white respectively.  2117.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tential “capping units” that were not visible from orbit and were a significant distance from the sedimentary units, indicating that the cap rock may be more complex than initially thought and likely not igneous in origin. The capping unit near the landing site, called Alfheim, proved to be an arkose-based sandstone, with fine, sub-rounded grains and the inclusion of hornblende, which was relatively unaltered, indicating that the sandstone was relatively immature. Upon reaching Jotenheim on Sol 4 it was confirmed that the capping unit was not igneous, as stand-off science (XRF [3] and Raman [4]) and MastCam imagery revealed another sub-arkosic sandstone and conglomerate. Close-up images of the Bifrost formation showed an increadibly fine-grained unit, with multiple alternating red and white layers within the stratigraphy, though close-up inspection with the rover showed that the finer banding was generally superficial and a result of mass-wasting of the unit [5]. The units all had very similar chemistry, with the exception that the red unit contained higher levels of iron – consistent with the interpretation that the formation of the Bifrost formation was likely very similar to that of the Painted Desert of Arizona, and higher iron-levels within the layers pointed to periods of slower deposition, allowing for increased levels of iron oxidation.  One of the most interesting discoveries of the mission was the discovery of more resistant units cropping-out within the Bifrost formation at Jotenheim, and further to the south in an area called Ragnarok. The deposits were visually similar to the capping units explored thus far, but importantly, were non-continuous. The interpretation of this data, is that the capping unit is the result of the insinuation of braided channel deposits draining from the higher stratigraphy to the west during regression events. Overall, the landing ellipse  region is interpreted to have been that of a deep inland sea, experiencing several transgression/regression events where a large amount sediment was deposited under calm conditions, and times of low sea-level resulted in the formation of channel deposits that today serve to cap the Bifrost formation. This type of environment would have been highly favourable for microorganisms and result in the burial and preservation of significant amounts of organic matter  Conclusions: The interpretations garnered from the rover-based observations of this mission critically changed our hypotheses regarding the geology of the landing ellipse: evolving from a solely deep-water depositional environment capped by igneous material, to one that revealed a complex history of transgression/regression events that led to the increadibly varied morphology seen today. The next step in this process is to compare the interpretations based on rover-collected data to those made from boots-on-the-ground (a.k.a astronaut) collected data, which would serve to address the fidelity of rover-based science interpretations. This work is still ongoing and will be continude during the 2016 deployment. Acknowledgements: Thank you to the CanMars 2015 team, whose hard work and dedication made this mission a success. This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada’s CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency. We would like to acknowledge Hans van ’t Woud of Blackshore and its partners, including  European Space imaging and EuroMoonMars research for the use of the colour Quickbird image that covers the analogue mission site. References: [1] Osinski et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [2] MEPAG Goals Committee (2015) MEPAG Goals Document. [3] Caudill et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [4] Mittleholtz et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [5] Mittleholtz et al. (2015b) LPS XLVII. This conf. Figure 2. (a) Right image shows layered unit within landing ellipse. Comparing to analogous environment of Painted Desert, AZ., layered deposits then likely formed in lacustrine environment, revealing successions from deeper, calmer waters (red layers) to higher-energy shallow environment, grey/blue layers. (b) Smiley-face feature. Capping unit can be seen on far-left of image, and is visible in parts along ridge system, though not seen in image at this scale.  Figure 3. Annotated aerial image showing rover path from landing (red circle) along each waypoint (blue circles) from Sol 0 to Sol 11. 2117.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
