2137.PDF
BOUNDARY CONDITIONS MODELLING OF PERMITTIVITY MEASUREMENTS OF POWDERS IN COAXIAL AIRLINE.  D. Hickson1, S. Sotodeh1, M. Daly1, and R. Ghent2,3, 1Centre for Research in Earth and Space Science, York University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, ON, Canada, M3J 1P3 (hicksodc@yorku.ca), 2Department of Earth Sciences, University of Toronto, 22 Russel St., Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 3B1, 3 Planetary Science Institute, 1700 East Fort Lowell, Tucson, AZ, USA, 85719-2395.  Introduction: Active remote sensing techniques in the microwave regime are extensively used in observing planetary bodies through terrestrial/orbiting radar and ground penetrating radar. The reflectivity and penetration depth of a radar signal incident on a surface are largely determined by that materials dielectric response at a given frequency. For bodies whose surfaces consist of regolith material, such as asteroids, properties of that regolith may be extracted from a radar return if constraints on the permittivity of the regolith are known. Providing information on permittivity of regolith materials is therefore relevant for missions to asteroids such as (101955) Bennu, the target of NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission.  A popular and effective method for measuring the permittivity of a material is the Transmission Line method utilizing a coaxial airline and network analyzer [1]. This technique has the advantage of broadband measurement, being relatively inexpensive, and recently has been shown to have the capacity of measuring powdered samples [2, 3]. The measurement of the dielectric constant of powders has been a focus in recent research and measurement techniques are not totally refined [4, 5]. For a powdered sample, the measured value resultant from the transmission line method is the effective permittivity of the entire region within the sample holder. The effective permittivity is a combination of each phase within the airline; water, air, and the solid sample. Samples can be oven baked to remove residual moisture in the sample holder, resulting in a two phase composite of air and solid sample. Mixing equations can be utilized to extract the permittivity of the solid phase of the composite (true permittivity of the sample). These equations are based on the assumption of homogeneity within the sample holder as well as consistent particle shape. These theoretical assumptions are not valid when considering a powdered sample in a coaxial airline.  In this study the real part of the permittivity (dielectric constant) of powdered aluminum oxide (Al2O3) is measured in a 7 mm and 14 mm coaxial airline at 7.5 GHz for multiple sample batches with varying grain size. The true permittivity of aluminum oxide is extracted from these measurements using the Bruggeman (Effective Medium Approximation) mixing equation [6]. A model is developed for powders in a coaxial airline based on the layered capacitance air gap correction model by [7] to account for boundary conditions within the sample holder, while displaying potential to compensate for particle shape effects. The model uses experimental results to calculate a value for the dielectric constant of aluminum oxide. The results of this study are then compared to accepted values for the dielectric constant of aluminum oxide from the literature.  Method:   Experimental Procedure: Seven sample batches of aluminum oxide grit ranging in grain size from 76 µm to 940 µm were used in this experiment. The samples were oven baked at a constant temperature of 200o C for 48 hours prior to measurement. Complex permittivity was measured in a 7 mm (HP 85051B) and 14 mm (GR 900-LZ) airline connected to an Agilent E5071C280 ENA series vector network analyzer. The complex permittivity of each sample was calculated from the Sparameters measured by the network analyzer using the NIST Non-Iterative algorithm [8] (Figure 1). In Figure 1 the effects of grain size and porosity on the measured effective permittivity are apparent. The measured values for the dielectric constant of alu2137.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
minum oxide are much lower (3 - 4) than the values found in the literature (9 - 10, see Table 1) due to the contribution of the air phase in the powder to the measured effective permittivity.  Boundary Conditions & Mixing Modelling: A physical explanation for some of the observed trends in Figure 1 is that there are conditions at the boundary of the sample holder (interface between sample and conductor) that are different than within the bulk sample. Particles pack more densely in the bulk of the sample whereas particles along the sample/conductor interface have more pore space around them. Under the same logic this effect is exaggerated for larger grain sizes. Through geometric analysis constrains on the extent of the 'boundary region' within the sample holder for each grain size measured were established. The layered capacitance model [7], typically used for solid sample air gap correction, is used as a basis for accounting for the difference between the permittivity in the 'sample region' and in the 'boundary region'.  The effective permittivity of each region is determined by calculating the porosity of each region, assuming the permittivity of air to be εair = 1.00058986 (measured experimentally), and guessing at possible values for the inclusion permittivity. Iterating through possible values of inclusion permittivity from 0 - 100, the output of the model (calculated effective permittivity) is compared to the experimental values (measured effective permittivity) obtained in Figure 1.  Results: The values for the inclusion permittivity that output a calculated effective permittivity within a tolerance of 0.0005 to the experimentally measured effective permittivity are shown in Figure 2. The dielectric constant predicted without consideration of the boundary conditions (blue points) decrease with increasing grain size, as predicted in the geometric analysis (boundary region would extend farther into airline). Since each sample was the same material, aluminum oxide, the results in Figure 2 should ideally be a straight line. The model results  (red points) are in better agreement than the classical mixing results and have a smaller standard deviation. Furthermore the model results better reflect the values for the dielectric constant of alumina found in the literature.  The model predicted relatively higher dielectric constants for smaller grain size samples (Figure 2.b). Through microscopic analysis the smaller grains are more elliptical than the larger grains that are more spherical. When modelling the smaller grain sizes as needles rather than spheres the dielectric constant is lower than that predicted by classical mixing. This outcome is expected and is a result of the particle shapes having depolarization factors between that of a sphere and that of a needle. By measuring average grain dimensions for a sample batch, the output of the model can be more accurate to the true dielectric constant of the measured material.  References:  [1] Venkatesh, M. S., and G. S. V. Raghavan. CSBE 47.7 15-30. [2] Sotodeh S. (2014) York Univ. Masters Thesis. [3] Stillman, D., and Olhoeft, G. J. Geophys. Res. 113.E9 (2008). [4] Tuhkala, M. et al. J. Appl. Phys. 114.1 (2013). [5] Kiley, Erin M., et al. J Microwave Power EE 46.1 26-38. [6] Sihvola, A. IET 47 (1999). [7] Baker-Jarvis, J. et al. NASA STI/Recon Technical Report N 93 (1992). [8] Boughriet, B-H. et al. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. 45.1 (1997). [9] Dube, D. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 3.11 (1970). [10] Gershon, D. et al J. Appl. Phys. 89.12 (2001). [11] Krupka, J, et al. Meas. Sci. Technol. 9.10 (1998). [12] Rajab, K. et al. JMEP 5.1 2-7 (2008). 2137.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
