 GLENN EXTREME ENVIROMENTS RIG (GEER) FOR PLANETARY SCIENCE.  T. Kremic, L. Nakley, D. Vento, J. Balcerski, M. J. Kulis, N. S. Jacobson and G. C. C. Costa Glenn Extreme Environments Laboratory, NASA Glenn Research Center, 2100 Brookpark Road Cleveland, OH (tibor.kremic@nasa.gov).   Introduction:  Science, technology, and planetary mission communities have a growing interest in the unique physiochemical properties and processes that occur under extreme temperature and pressure conditions in exotic and even hostile chemical environments. The lower atmosphere and surface of Venus, terrestrial deep sea vents, and the atmospheres of Gas Giants are examples of such environments. Further, the steadily growing catalog of exoplanets likely contains many examples of bodies with environments dramatically different than the surface of the Earth. Understanding these properties and processes will help us understand the history and present day state of inhospitable and even inaccessible regions of the Earth as well as other solar or extrasolar planets [e.g. 1, 2]. Evidence for the scientific importance and relevance of such environments can be seen in the intense research focus on potentially Earth (and Venus and Mars)-like exoplanets. Additionally, Venus and Saturn targets are prioritized in the current Planetary Decadal Survey, with reference missions that include in-situ investigations of these challenging environments. The fact that two of the five recent Discovery mission proposals selected for further development are Venus-focused adds additional priority and even urgency to laboratory-based extreme environment investigations.   In addition to the importance of science-focused investigations, there is a current and future need for understanding the behavior of advanced technological materials for operation within extreme environments. Furthermore, the resiliency and ultimate success of planetary missions is dependent upon performance testing of instruments and systems in conditions that closely approximate those of the target [3, 4]. Better knowledge of the properties of these materials for energy, defense, deep mining, planetary and space exploration applications would offer better technologies and future science from NASA missions; including those to Venus [1, 2]. Until April of 2015, there was limited ability to accurately simulate Venus surface-like conditions in a vessel large enough to accommodate full-size instruments and components. This gap in capability is being addressed by NASA Glenn's Extreme Environment Rig, called GEER, located in Cleveland, Ohio.  This large chamber allows for engineering tests of newlydeveloped as well as heritage instruments, while simultaneously affording opportunities for geochemical and materials-based science investigations.   GEER capabilities:  This presentation provides the features and characteristics of the NASA's unique Glenn Extreme Environment Rig (GEER) and briefly mentions some of the unique contributions that may be expected based on the first few months of operations. GEER is capable of simulating the high temperature and pressure extremes up to Venus surface conditions as well as accurately reproducing the atmospheric chemical compositions of bodies in the solar system including those with acidic and hazardous elements. In the Venus configuration, GEER can reproduce conditions of the supercritical fluid expected at the surface of Venus, which is believed to consist of approximately 96.5 % of CO2, 3.5 % of N2, 30 ppm of H2O, 150 ppm of SO2, 28 ppm of CO, 15 ppm of OCS, 3 ppm of H2S, 0.5 ppm of HCl and 5 ppb of HF at 92 bar (1330 psi) and 467 C) [5]. With GEER, specific gas quantities can be very accurately injected and then controlled down to parts per million accuracy, depending on the gas.  Currently, the amount of the chemical species present in the gas or supercritical mixture simulated in GEER can be probed by mass spectrometry. The mass spectrometry analyses are carried out by sampling aliquots of gases from the GEER chamber at regular intervals for analysis with a high sensitivity quadrupole mass spectrometer which can be tuned to specific chemical species. A Raman spectrometer system has been developed and will be integrated with GEER in the spring of 2016. The Raman spectrometer will be used to continuously collect the spectra of the gas or supercritical fluid mixture during the experiments and will provide complementary information based on vibrational symmetry of the chemical species present in GEER. Beyond providing continuous feedback analysis of the chemistry the GEER team can perform computational modeling of the thermodynamic properties of the gas or supercritical fluid mixture using a free energy minimization method in the FactSage software package [6-8]. This initial modeled data is crucial to understand the relations between the dynamics and fluid chemistry of the chemical species at different conditions of pressure and temperature.  In addition to a summary of capabilities, the presentation provides basic operational approaches and constraints that future users may encounter. This will pro vide practical information for scientists, technologists and mission planners.     Operating details and some early results: In a typical simulation of an extreme environment (Fig. 1), the system is brought to very low pressures (10-6 Torr) at ambient temperature and is then filled with the desired gas mixture.  Currently liquid water is weighed then added manually through a fill port on the vessel but this process is planned to be automated. All other constituents are delivered to the vessel in gas phase using high accuracy mass flow controllers at approximately 34 atm (500 psi). Heat is then applied and controlled to bring the system to the desired steady-state operating point.  Figure 1. Schematic view of the GEER operation system.  During a test, the system is fully operated from a remote station elsewhere in the building. Temperature is controlled to within 1 degree C and pressure is monitored throughout the duration of the experiment. Chemistry monitoring is done with the sampling process and mass spectrometry, or other analytical tools as described earlier. A boost system allows the injection of high pressure gases during the experiment to change the chemistry or partial pressures or to top of the system pressure with the original mixture should small leaks occur.  At the end of the test, the system is allowed to cool and then is vented as required based on the constituents and volumes of the chemicals that are in the main vessel. Since the GEER facility involves operations in thermochemical regimes rarely explored by other industrial or scientific apparatus, it is expected that opportunities for scientific and technical investigation and discovery will arise. In some cases this is due to inability of existing chemical models to accurately represent the observed behavior of complex systems at very high pressure and temperature. Preliminary observations of the behavior of the GEER chamber during heating and pressurization have shown a non-linear increase in pressure as temperature was increased (Fig. 2). That this behavior was observed only in the presence of a Venus-simulant atmosphere (and not when using a simple CO2-N2 mix) illustrates the importance and potential of using specialized laboratory facilities to probe environments that are difficult or impossible to otherwise explore.     Figure 2. Temperature / Pressure Profile from GEER test.  References: [1] Venus Exploration Analysis Group (VEXAG), "Venus exploration themes" February (2014). [2] Venus Exploration Analysis Group (VEXAG), "Roadmap for Venus exploration" March (2014). [3] D. Daval et al, "Carbonation of Ca-bearing silicates, the case of wollastonite: Experimental investigations and kinetic modelling" Chemical Geology 262, 262-277 (2009). [4] Y. Kato, "Advanced high temperature gas-cooled reactor systems" Journal of Engineering for Gas Turbines and Power 132, 012902/1-012902-7 (2010). [5] B. Fegley Jr., "Venus" In: Meteorites, Comets and Planets, Chapter 2.7 Treatise on Geochemistry, Ed. A. M. Davis, Elsevier Science, 2nd ed. 127-147 (2014). [6] C. W. Bale et al, "FactSage thermochemical software and databases" Calphad 26 (2), 189-228 (2002). [7] A. B. Belonoshiko et al, "Superfluid: A fortran-77 program for calculation of Gibbs free energy and volume of C-H-O-N-S-Ar mixtures" Comput. Geosci. 18 (9), 1267-1269 (1992). [8] P. Shi, S. K. Saxena, "Thermodynamic modeling of the C-H-O-S fluid system" American Mineralogist 77, 1038-1049 (1992). 