2192.PDF
CHARACTERIZATION OF NANOPHASE IRON OXIDES PRODUCED THROUGH BIOREDUCTION BY HYPERTHERMOPHILES.  S. B. Kashyap1, E. C. Sklute2, J. F. Holden1, and M. D. Dyar2, 1University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Dept. of Microbiology, Amherst, MA. 01003. 2Mount Holyoke College, Dept. of Astronomy, South Hadley, MA, 01075, skashyap@umass.edu.   Introduction:  It is likely that any putative life in our solar system beyond Earth, past or present, is microbial. Finding distinct evidence of microbial life from the early Earth and beyond Earth is challenging because all organic signatures of that life may have been lost. For this reason, understanding the mineralogy associated with microbial life is important because it could help reveal and identify extinct or extant life in an extraterrestrial environment. Microorganisms that pass electrons to Fe3+ oxide minerals and reduce them exogenously to form other iron oxide minerals are among the more favorable organisms to study for microbial mineral transformations. Of these microorganisms, hyperthermophiles (Topt >80°C) occupy the deepest and least evolved branches in the phylogenetic tree of life [1], and thus astrobiologists are interested in them because they may represent extraterrestrial life elsewhere in the universe. However, most of what is known about microbial Fe(III) reduction has been established for mesophiles rather than the hyperthermophiles. Our study examines the rates and constraints of Fe(III) bioreduction by hyperthermophilic archaea in order to address the types of Fe(III) (oxyhydr)oxides that are favored for growth of hyperthermophiles, rates of growth and Fe(II) production for these organisms, and mineralogy of Fe(III) bioreduction and variations with electron acceptor. Methods:  A range of nanophase Fe(III) (oxyhydr)oxides (2-line-ferrihydrite, lepidocrocite, hematite, goethite, maghemite and akaganéite) were synthesized after the methods of [1-3]. All oxides were purified and verified by XRD but stored in solution to maintain mineral-fluid surface properties. Additionally, the original ferrihydrite (wet Fh) was freeze dried and re-precipitated (dry Fh) to understand the effect of mineral aggregate size and shape on bioreduction.  Pyrodictium sp. Su06 was grown on modified DSM Medium 1210 [2], without the acetate, with H2CO2 (80:20%; 2 atm) and trace (0.02%) yeast extract as the carbon and energy sources, and with one of the above oxides as the electron acceptor. Four variations were performed for each experiment to add controls to the study: 1) a sample with no cells added (but with growth medium and oxide) that was left at room temperature (RT), 2) a sample with no cells that was incubated at 90º C, 3) a sample with cells was left at RT, and 4) a sample with cells was incubated at 90 ºC. Growth and Fe(II) were determined as in [3]. Transformed mineral products were characterized using Mössbauer (See-Co.W100; 80 mCi 57Co in Rh; referenced to -Fe foil), mid infrared attenuated total reflectance (MIR ATR; Thermo Fisher Nicolet 6700 FTIR, 256 scans per spectrum), Visible near infrared (VNIR; ASD Fieldspec3 Max), and Raman (WiTec alpha300R confocal imaging system; 532 nm Nd YAG  laser; 50X; 360 1-second integrations) spectroscopies.  Results:  Preliminary results indicate that Sully only grows readily on ferrihydrite (15-18 mM Fe2+ production for wet and dry Fh), although it will grow sluggishly on akaganéite (2 mM Fe2+), and maghemite (1 mM Fe2+). Figure 1 shows phase micrographs for wet and dry Fh. There is a marked difference in the density and shape of the agglomerates as well as their interaction with the surrounding fluid. However, this difference is not reflected in cell yields or Fe(II)  production (Figure 2).     Figure 1. Phase micrographs for wet (left) Dry (right) Fh.   Figure 2. Growth curve (right) and cell yield (left) for wet (red) and dry (blue) ferrihydrite. Fe(II) is concentrated in mineral the mineral phase, not the fluid. The mineral end product produced from the bioreduction of ferrihydrite by Su06 is a dark brown (dry) or black (wet) magnetic material, where none of the controls show magnetism. This product is only produced when there are both heat and cells (variation 4). Microscopically, variations 1-3 for wet Fh and 1-4 for dry Fh are mixtures of orange, brown, and black grains that all appear to be spectrally similar (e.g., Raman Figure 3), indicating that the color change here is not 2192.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
indicative of a phase change. The Raman spectra for wet Fh for variation 4 are, however, similar to nanophase magnetite. This is confirmed on the bulk scale for wet Fh by Mössbauer at 295 and 8K (Figure 4), which shows that variations 1-3 are ferrihydrite but variation 4 produces a mineral most similar to nanophase magnetite.    Figure 3. Raman spectra of mineral end products along with synthetic reference compounds. Vertical lines denote literature values for major peaks for ferrihydrite (3), magnetite (2) and maghemite (1 and 3).  Figure 4. Mössbauer spectra at 295K (left) and 4K (right) for wet Fh end products with synthetic reference compounds. Lines indicate peak positions for variation 4 (methods).       VNIR spectra (Figure 5) capture the color changes seen microscopically. Dry Fh samples show much less reflectance through the visible region, illustrating that they are generally darker samples. They also show a greater change with the application of heat, as evidenced by the nearly featureless variation 3 spectrum.       Although the Raman spectra for the dry Fh end product is closer to ferrihydrite than a magnetic phase, MIR ATR spectra (Figure 6) for both wet and dry Fh samples show an absorption at 536 cm-1 (reference magnetite and maghemite absorb at 546 cm-1). None of the control samples show this absorption.    Figure 5. VNIR spectra of wet and dry Fh reacted samples. Vertical lines show the position of the maghemite maximum (back) and ferrihydrite absorptions (brown). Spectra offset by amount indicated.   Figure 6. MIR ATR spectra of wet and dry Fh reacted samples. Vertical line shows the position of the maghemite absorption. Spectra offset by amount indicated.  Conclusion: The hyperthermophile Pyrodictium sp. Su06 grows well on both wet and dry Fh but only nominally on akaganéite and maghemite and does not grow on lepidocrocite, hematite, or goethite. Su06 grows marginally better on the smaller, less dense aggregates of wet Fh but for both cases, cells and heat (but no other conditions) produce a dark brown to black, magnetic mineral end product.      Multiple forms of spectroscopy used to analyze the end products indicate that the wet Fh end product is a fair match to nanophase magnetite but that the end product for dry Fh shows much more subtle changes, either resulting from less of the bulk phase being transformed or from a different end product.  References: [1] Woese, C. R. et al. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. , 87, 4576-4579. [2] Kashefi, K. et al. (2008) Geobiol. , 6, 147-154. [3] Lin, T. J. et al. (2014) Geobiol., 12, 200-211. 2192.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
