 TIMING OF FLUVIAL ACTIVITY IN THE XANTHE TERRA REGION OF MARS: IMPLICATIONS FOR HYPANIS DELTA, A POTENTIAL LANDING SITE FOR MARS2020. S. Eckes1, N.H. Warner1, S. Gupta2, M. O'Shea1, J. Smith1, A. Werynski1, 1Department of Geological Sciences, SUNY Geneseo, 1 College Circle, Geneseo, NY 14454; 2Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, Earth Science and Engineering, London, SW7 2AZ, UK. swe2@geneseo.edu & warner@geneseo.edu       Introduction: The Xanthe Terra region of Mars exhibits multiple fluvial networks that are of interest for future exploration. The timing of these channels is poorly constrained and it's not clear whether they formed at the same time or spanned a broader period of history [1,2,3]. Furthermore, sedimentary fans that are sourced by some of the channels are currently under consideration as landing sites for Mars2020. It is therefore critical to understand their timing within the chronostratigraphic context of Mars. Current estimates, based on crater counts from the fans, places the fluvial activity within the Hesperian to Early Amazonian epochs [1,2], relatively late in Mars history. Here, we present new data and new mapping efforts for Xanthe Terra to attempt to constrain the chronology of fluvial activity in this region. We demonstrate that the timing of river formation here spans a broad period of Mars history which includes the Late Noachian to likely the Early Amazonian. Methods: For this analysis we mapped all fluvial networks, impact craters, impact crater ejecta blankets, and secondary craters chains at 1:40,000 using a near complete Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter Context Camera (CTX) image mosaic (6 m/pixel). The goal of this mapping effort was to constrain the relative age of the fluvial networks as they compare to other local landforms. For example, our initial observations revealed that multiple fluvial networks cross-cut the lobate ejecta blankets of craters that exhibit a near-pristine morphology. However, other river systems are clearly superposed by craters and their ejecta, including those craters that appear more degraded. Our mapping focuses on these observed relative relationships. To evaluate the age relationships further, we also obtained impact crater statistics over the ejecta blankets of specific impact craters that are cross-cut by or superimpose rivers, with specific focus on craters that interact with the Hypanis and Nanedi Valles systems. We counted craters with diameters (D) > 200 m over the ejecta blankets and fit the data to established production and chronology functions [4,5] on cumulative size frequency distribution plots (SFD) to constrain a model age of crater formation. However, most crater studies that attempt to date craters by using a superposed population of smaller impact craters on the ejecta do not account for the possibility that the ejecta did not completely resurface the pre-existing crater population. In other words, it is unclear whether our counted > 200 m diameter craters rest solely on top of these ejecta blankets. It is possible, given the thickness of the ejecta blankets for (order of) 10 km-size craters and given depth/diameter relationships of craters of this size [6,7], that some craters may poke through the ejecta from the highland terrain beneath. This scenario would provide an overestimate of the formation age of the larger crater using crater statistics.  To better understand and resolve this issue, we constrained a mean thickness for each ejecta blanket in our count analysis using a 100 m High Resolution Stereo Camera digital elevation model (DEM). This was done by constructing multiple topographic profiles from the rim of the crater out to the distal edge of it's continuous ejecta blanket (approximately 1D distance from the crater rim). The mean thickness of the ejecta blanket at a given distance from the crater rim was estimated as the sum of the measured relief (relative to the surrounding highlands) of the ejecta at that distance divided over the number of measurements/profiles.  Results: Figure 1 provides our regional map of crater rims (black), ejecta blankets (yellow), fluvial networks (blue), and secondary crater rays (red). Hypanis Delta, Hypanis Valles, and Nanedi Valles are labelled for context.   Figure 1: Regional map constructed at 1:40,000 using CTX imagery displaying fluvial networks (blue), crater rims (black), crater ejecta (yellow), and secondary crater rays (red).   Here we provide a summary of an example impact crater that provides important relative age constraints for Hypanis Valles, the source of the Hypanis delta-like fan. A 70 km-diameter, complex crater centered at 8.2 N, 49.4 W is located just west of the southern headwaters of Hypanis Valles. This crater is referred to here as  15N. CTX imagery revealed that the eastern edge of 15N's lobate ejecta blanket superimposes both the southern and northern tributary branches to Hypanis Valles (Fig. 2). At this location, the ejecta material mutes the morphologic expression of both channels (Fig. 3).   Figure 2: Mapped expression of 15N's continuous ejecta blanket where it superimposes the north and south tributary branches of Hypanis Valles. Background image is a 100 m Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) Daytime IR mosaic.    Figure 3: Zoomed in view (CTX) of the junction between the north and south tributary branches of Hypanis Valles. The secondary rays and ejecta destroy portions of the channel, muting the well-defined appearrance of the channel walls.   Furthermore, secondary crater rays extend radially from the 15N impact structure across the interior valley walls of Hypanis. Both observations indicate that 15N post-dates Hypanis Valles. In contrast, Nanedi Vallis, a river system located south of Hypanis (Fig. 1) crosscuts the same eastern edge of the ejecta blanket showing no muted topography or cross-cutting of ejecta rays. Furthermore, the distal end of Nanedi itself incises into the floor of Hypanis Valles. This suggests that Nanedi post-dates Hypanis and that both valleys are separated in time by 15N. Impact crater statistics were collected from the ejecta blanket of 15N. However, topographic profiles taken across the 15N ejecta blanket revealed that at a distance of more than 20 km from the crater rim, 200 m - 1 km sized impact craters from the underlying highland terrain may poke through the thin ejecta (depending on distance from the rim). The data indicate that within a 20 km annulus that is closest to the crater rim, most 200 m - 1 km sized small craters should superimpose the ejecta blanket. Their SFD is the best representation of the time since 15N formed that can be achieved by crater statistics. A model age fit of craters between 500 m and 1 km in size (385 craters over 7000 km2) provided a Late Noachian (3.7 Ga) model age for crater 15N within this annulus. Craters < 500 m in diameter are poorly preserved on the rugged ejecta blanket and exterior region of the rim. The slope of the SFD of craters of this size range is therefore lower than standard production models.  Discussion and Conclusion: Relative age relationships between a Late Noachian-age impact crater (15N) and Hypanis Valles suggest that the Hypanis Valles system is older than the crater. This confirms that the channel and its delta-like fan are also Late Noachian in age (or older) and is consistent with an independent age assessment presented in [8, this meeting]. Furthermore, because Nanedi Valles cross-cuts the ejecta blanket of 15N and incises into Hypanis Valles, we suggest that not only is Nanedi younger than Hypanis, but it is separated by a relatively large gap in geologic time that is marked by the impact of a 70-kmdiameter crater. This observation provides the first indication for a longer-lived fluvial history on Xanthe Terra.  Other observations from nearby valley networks and craters suggest that many channels in this region also post-date relatively fresh, pristine impact craters (Fig. 4). These fluvial systems are similar in age to previously reported Late Hesperian to Early Amazonian valley networks and fans in this region [1,2] but also confirm our hypothesis that fluvial activity spanned a longer period of Mars history than previously considered.   Figure 4: CTX mosaics of example near-pristine craters that are superimposed by valley networks in Xanthe Terra. The relative chronology and crater statistics from these craters suggest that they are younger than the Early Hesperian.  The valley networks therefore are much younger in comparison to Hypanis Valles.   References: [1] Hauber, E. et al. (2013). JGR 118. [2] Hauber et al. (2013). Second Workshop on Mars Valley Networks. 27. [3] Achille, G. D. et al. (2006). JGR-Planets. 111. [4] Ivanov, B. (2001). Space Sci. Rev. 96. [5] Hartmann & Neukum et al. (2001). Space Sci. Rev. 96. [6] Tornabene, L. et al. (2013). 44th LPSC. 2592. [7] Garvin, J. et al. (2003). 6th Int. Conf. Mars. 3277. [8] O'Shea et al. (2016). 47th LPSC. This meeting.  