2202.PDF
SUBSURFACE VOLATILE ABUNDANCE IN A MARTIAN DOUBLE LAYER EJECTA CRATER.  D. Viola1  (dviola@lpl.arizona.edu), A. S. McEwen1, C. M. Dundas2, and S. Byrne1, 1University of Arizona, Department of Planetary Sciences, 2USGS Astrogeology Science Center.   Introduction:  Double layer ejecta (DLE) craters, which are surrounded by two distinct lobate ejecta deposits, are commonly found on Mars [e.g. 1, 2], although they have also been identified on Ganymede [3]. The formation mechanism for this ejecta type is unclear, but several hypotheses have been proposed, including a base surge [4], atmospheric effects [5], dry granular flows [6], and impacts directly into ice [7]. Since DLE craters are more common in the Martian mid-latitudes, where subsurface ice is generally stable, it is likely that volatiles play a role in their formation. Volatiles are also critical in the formation of expanded craters [8], which undergo thermokarstic alteration after impacting into a subsurface excess ice layer. The modern presence of expanded craters further suggests that an ice sheet must remain in order to support the surrounding terrain, since widespread excess ice loss would result in the collapse of these features. Expanded secondary craters, which have been mapped in the region of Arcadia Planitia, present evidence for an excess ice sheet >20 Myrs old and offer an estimate of the amount of ice present today [9].  We have identified an unnamed 15-km DLE crater  centered at 219.6°E, 50.4°N, within the Arcadia Planitia study area in [9],  which contains abundant superposed expanded secondary craters. Since these secondary craters most likely originated simultaneously from the same impact event, we posit that local variations reflect differences in initial surface properties – specifically, differences in subsurface ice content. Mapping and measuring these secondary craters can therefore provide constraints on the amount of ice present within the ejecta layers and the surrounding terrain today, and has implications for the formation mechanism of this unique ejecta morphology. Methods:  We used three HiRISE Digital Terrain Models (DTMs) that span the inner ejecta, outer ejecta, and terrain surrounding the DLE crater. All small craters were mapped as ellipses using the Crater Helper Tools add-in for ArcGIS, and those that were not clearly primary craters in nature were classified  by morphology type: expanded, non-expanded, or ambiguous. Planar parameters, such as major and minor axis lengths, were measured. For expanded craters that did not overlap, we further measured three-dimensional parameters, including depths, and determined the volumes based on the method described in [9]. We use these volumes as a proxy for the amount of ice lost to sublimation during the expansion process. Figure 1: Distribution of secondary craters superposed on the study DLE. (a) Geographic distribution showing the three HiRISE DTMs that were mapped with the ejecta layers delineated. (b)  Breakdown of the number of craters with each morphology in each region as a percentage of the total in the region. a b 2202.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Results:  A total of 10,835 secondary craters were mapped: 1139 on the inner ejecta, 4143 on the outer ejecta, and 5562 in the surrounding terrain. Geographic Distribution: Figure 1a shows the geographic distribution of superposed secondary craters within the three DTMs that were mapped, and the total number of craters of each type in each region of interest (inner ejecta, outer ejecta, and surrounding terrain) is shown in Figure 1b. There is a clear trend in this data, where the inner ejecta layer contains the greatest proportion of expanded craters, and the surrounding terrain contains the lowest proportion of expanded craters. The size-frequency distributions of all craters superposed in each region of interest also demonstrates this trend, where the inner ejecta curve tends towards larger diameters at similar frequencies, although there is some overlap of smaller craters superposed on the inner and outer ejecta layers  (Figure 2). It is possible that variations in the secondary crater field contribute to these differences, but the correlation with the ejecta boundaries suggests that variations in surface properties also plays an important role. Volume of Ice Lost: Table 1 shows the median and average volumes of ice lost from the expanded, nonoverlapping secondary craters that were measured in each region. It is interesting to note that, while the median volumes of ice lost from expanded craters is roughly similar across all regions, the averages are much higher for the inner ejecta and suggest that more expansion took place in the craters which superpose the inner ejecta. The fact that there are many small expanded craters in all regions may suggest that the depth to reach the excess ice layer is similar across the study area. However, since the inner ejecta contains more highly expanded craters, these secondaries may have penetrated into a thicker subsurface ice layer. Table 1: Volumes of Non-Overlapping Expanded Secondaries Location # craters measured Median volume (m3) Average volume (m3) Inner Ejecta 505 5190 14638 Outer Ejecta 1354 6186 12806 Surroundings 594 5747 9649 Discussion: We assume that the degree of secondary crater expansion is directly related to the amount and depth of excess ice present when the secondary craters formed due to the thermokarstic nature of the expansion process. Based on this, we can conclude from this data that there must have been more excess ice present in the inner ejecta layer as compared to the outer ejecta layer and the surroundings at the time of the impact that produced the superposed secondaries. There are several possible explanations for this trend. It is possible that excess ice was deposited after the DLE impact event in the form of snowfall that was subsequently buried in dust. However, in this case it is unclear why there would be a distinct difference in the volatile content between the ejecta layers and the surroundings. Alternatively, the excess ice could have been preserved from the time that the DLE crater formed, or excess ice could have developed after the impact event in the form of subsurface ice lenses. Both of these possibilities have implications for the formation of DLE craters. In the former case, several formation hypotheses invoke volatile-rich processes based on the geographic distribution of DLE craters on Mars, and the present-day distribution of volatiles may be representative of the volatile content of the initial ejecta-forming process. In the latter case, since ice lens growth has been shown to depend on regolith particle sizes [10], the present distribution of excess ice may offer insight into the particle sizes that originally comprised each layer of the DLE crater. We will consider the DLE formation hypotheses in the context of these possibilities and the volatile distribution that we observe in the ejecta layers today. References: [1] Barlow N. G. & Bradley T. L. (1990). Icarus, 87, 156-179. [2] Barlow N. G. (2005). GSA Special Paper 384, 433-442. [3] Boyce J. M. et al. (2010). Meteoritics & Planet. Sci.,45, 638-661. [4] Boyce J. M. & Mouginis-Mark P. (2006). JGR, 111, E10005. [5] Schultz P. H. (1992). JGR, 97, 1162311662. [6] Wada K. & Barnouin-Jha S. (2006). Meteoritics & Planet. Sci., 41, 1551-1569. [7] Weiss D. K. & Head J. W. (2013). GRL, 40, 3819-3824. [8] Dundas C. M., et al. (2015). Icarus, 262, 154-169. [9] Viola D. et al. (2015). Icarus, 248, 190-204. [10] Sizemore H. G. et al. (2015). Icarus, 251, 191-210. Figure 2: Incremental size-frequency distribution of superposed secondary craters overlying each region of interest: inner ejecta (green), outer ejecta (yellow), and surrounding terrain (cyan).  2202.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
