 HIGHLY SIDEROPHILE ELEMENT FRACTIONATIONS IN APOLLO 16 IMPACT MELT ROCKS: EFFECTS OF SMALL-SCALE PROCESSES.  P. Gleißner 1 and H. Becker 1, 1 Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Geologische Wissenschaften, Malteserstr. 74-100, 12249 Berlin, Germany (gleissner@zedat.fu-berlin.de)   Introduction:  The record of ancient lunar impact rocks may provide constrains on the composition of material accreted late to the Moon and the terrestrial planets. Increasingly precise highly siderophile element (HSE) data are now available for ancient lunar impact melt rocks but the origin of observed differences in composition is debated [1-5]. In the simplest case, HSE budgets of lunar impact rocks are assumed to be controlled by a HSE-rich impactor and HSE-poor lunar crust. In these cases, regressions of HSE vs. Ir from different subsamples of the same rock should yield linear trends with slopes corresponding to the HSE/Ir ratio of the impactor. However, in many cases, scatter beyond analytical uncertainty, curved trends and non-zero intercepts are observed and interpreted as either subcentimeter-scale fractionation processes during crystallization [3], target contributions [2] or simply incomplete mixing of HSE carrier phases from impactors with different compositions [5]. For a better evaluation of multi-aliquot analyses of small quantities of lunar samples we focus on small-scale processes using combined HSE+S data to model solid metal-liquid metal fractionation processes during impact melt crystallization. HSE carrier in lunar impact melt rocks:  Among the different lunar impact rock lithologies, clast-free or nearly clast-free samples displaying igneous fabrics were entirely molten and are interpreted as impact melt rocks. Their HSE budget is dominated by Fe-Ni metalschreibersite-troilite intergrowths, which occur in many Apollo 16 samples [e.g. 3-7&13]. From textural observations and the common presence of sulfide and phosphide phases the intergrowths are interpreted as former droplets of an immiscible Fe-Ni-P-S melt within the impact melt [6&7]. The light elements S and P lower the liquidus temperature of Fe-Ni alloys, leading to dissolution of impactor and target metal, whereas preexisting clasts of silicate minerals like plagioclase may not dissolve completely in the impact melt. The Fe-NiP-S phase intergrowths play further an important role during solid metal-liquid metal partitioning of the HSE during solidification of the melt [8]. Methods:  Samples were crushed into coarsegrained chips and metal grains were separated according to their magnetic properties. In order to obtain precise concentration data we followed the well established analytical procedure of [3]. Appropriate amounts of spike solutions were added to aliquots of ~100 mg rock and ~5-8 mg metal and digested in reverse aqua regia in a high-pressure asher. The HSE and S were separated by cation exchange chromatography and solvent extraction (Os). Measurements were performed at the FU Berlin using ICP-MS (Element XR) and negative TIMS (ThermoFinnigan Triton) instruments. Total analytical blanks contributed generally less than 0.5 % for Os, Ir and Ru, <3 % for Au and Rh, <5 % for Re, Pd and Pt and <20 % for S. In order to test whether the average whole rock HSE composition of studied lunar impact melt rocks is representative of the melts they crystallized from or if they were modified by fractional crystallization and segregation processes we modeled HSE partitioning between liquid and solid metal during crystallization of the immiscible Fe-Ni-P-S liquids. We use a recent parameterization for the Fe-Ni-P-S-C system, compiled from experimental work at conditions of 1atm and 1050-1500°C [8], which are relevant for post-shock crystallization of impact melt rocks. Input parameters were on one hand the relative HSE composition of the starting liquid-metal and on the other hand absolute amounts of light elements. In silicate melt-Fe-Ni metal melt equilibria, S and P partition largely into the metallic melt but upon further cooling are incompatible in solid metal. For our calculations we used a constant D sol/liq value of 0.01 for S [9] and calculated D sol/liq values for P, which in turn depend on S concentration and range from 0.1 to 0.2 [8]. Since both are incompatible in solid metal their concentrations increase in the remaining metal melt, as crystallization proceeds. To account for changes of the liquid phase we adjusted the D sol/liq HSE values for each 1% crystallization step according to S and P concentrations in the metal melt. Results and Discussion:  The aliquots of individual samples generally display broad correlations when plotted in Ir vs. HSE concentration diagrams. However, scatter and deviation from true linearity is observed especially for some of the mineral separates. This effect is more pronounced for Pd which was observed in previous studies as well [3-5]. No correlation was observed between sulfur and the HSE in the rock aliquots, indicating that both are controlled by different phases. Mineral separates display the largest spread in absolute concentrations and element ratios and are therefore interpreted to reflect different steps through a crystallization sequence. The most conspicuous feature is the correlation between sulfur content and the overall fractionation of the whole HSE pattern, which includes characteristic suprachondritic Ru/Pt ratios (Fig. 1).  The absolute and relative amount of light elements is of critical importance for the HSE partitioning behavior [8]. In mafic Apollo 16 impact melt rocks sulfur and phosphorous are present in similar amounts. However, while phosphorus partitions easily into the metallic liquid [10], especially if it is reduced to is metallic state [11], the solubility of sulfur in liquid metal is significantly reduced under the low oxygen fugacity conditions of the lunar surface and a lower partition coefficient can be expected [12]. For the latter reasons lower sulfur concentrations in immiscible metallic liquid are likely. This assumption is consistent with measured P/S ratios of ~3-4 in separated metal spherules [13]. The analyzed metal-, sulfide- and phosphidebearing mineral separates resemble trapped metallic liquid compositions and variations between them are best explained by millimeter-scale fractionation processes between solid metal and residual liquid during cooling of the impact melt. All mineral separates are well-explained by whole rock-like relative HSE abundances of the initial metallic liquid and light element contents of 0.5 wt.% sulfur and 6 wt.% phosphorus (Fig. 2). In detail, the HSE composition of the weakly magnetic fraction fits a calculated residual metallic liquid composition after fractional crystallization of roughly 20 % Fe-Ni metal. In contrast, the strongly magnetic fraction displays the highest HSE content but the least fractionated pattern, consistent with accumulation of early solid metal. Implications for the determination of HSE ratios:  Nonzero intercepts of regression calculations and deviations from true linearity, as observed in some impact melt rock studies [2-5] may reflect, at least in some cases, the graphical expression of local smallscale fractionation processes. They are not necessarily related to target contributions or physical mixing of HSE carrier phases of different impactors. Such variations make HSE/Ir ratios obtained from regression of multiple aliquot data highly susceptible to errors due to changes in their slope in HSE-Ir diagrams. In order to obtain reliable element ratios, weighted averages of concentrations determined on aliquots should be used. This approach represents the full element budget of the samples and integrates differences in absolute and relative abundances of HSE due to small-scale solid metalliquid metal partitioning during crystallization as well as due to physical separation during sample preparation.  References: [1] Norman M. D. et al. (2002) EPSL, 202, 217-228. [2] Puchtel I. S. et al. (2008) GCA, 72, 3022-3042. [3] Fischer-Gödde M. and Becker H. (2012) GCA, 77, 135-156. [4] Sharp M. et al. (2014) GCA, 131, 62-80. [5] Liu J. et al. (2015) GCA, 155, 122-153. [6] Misra K. C. and Taylor L. A. (1975) Proc. LSC, 615-659. [7] Vaniman D. T. and Papike J. J. (1980) Proc. Conf. Lunar Highlands Crust, 271337. [8] Chabot N. L. et al. (2014) LPSC 45, Abstract #1165. [9] Chabot N. L. et al. (2009) Meteoritic & Planet. Sci., 44, 505-519. [10] Schmitt W. et al. (1989) GCA, 53, 173-185. [11] Yakovlev O. I. et al. (2006) Geochem.Int., 44, 847-854. [12] Rose-Weston L. et al. (2009) GCA, 73, 4598-4615. [13] Palme H. et al. (1982) LPSC 13, 609-610.   Fig. 1. CI chondrite normalized HSE and S pattern for individual aliquots of sample 60335.   Fig. 2 Measured HSE/Ir ratios and S/Ir ratios normalized to CI chondrite for mineral separates of different magnetic susceptibility together with results of modeling of crystallization processes considering the effects of light elements.  Acknowledgements:  This work is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Grant: Be1820/121) and samples were provided by NASA JSC. 