2284.PDF
HIGHEST SPATIAL RESOLUTION NEW HORIZONS LEISA SPECTRAL-IMAGING SCAN OF PLUTO.W.M. Grundy,1 R.P. Binzel,2 J.C. Cook,3 D.P. Cruikshank,4 C.M. Dalle Ore,5,4 A.M. Earle,2 K. Ennico,4 D.E. Jennings,6 C.J.A. Howett,3 I.R. Linscott, A.W. Lunsford,6 C.B. Olkin,3 A.H. Parker,3 J.Wm. Parker,3 S. Philippe,7 S. Protopapa,8 E. Quirico7, D.C. Reuter,6 B. Schmitt,7 K.N. Singer,3 J.R. Spencer,3 J.A. Stansberry,9 S.A. Stern,3 C.C.C.Tsang,3 A.J. Verbiscer,10 H.A. Weaver,11 L.A. Young3, K.L. Berry12,13, and the New Horizons Science Team. 1LowellObservatory, Flagstaff AZ (w.grundy@lowell.edu), 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 3Southwest Research Institute, 4NASA Ames Research Center, 5SETI Institute, 6NASA Goddard Space Flight Center,  7Université GrenobleAlpes / CNRS - IPAG, 8University of Maryland, 9Space Telescope Science Institute, 10University of Virginia, 11JohnsHopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 12Northern Arizona University, 13United States Geological Survey.Observation:  The Linear Etalon Imaging SpectralArray (LEISA) component of New Horizons' Ralph instrument [1] provides spectral  coverage from 1.25 to2.5 µm, at a resolving power (λ/Δλ) of 240.  LEISA'sspectral dispersion is provided by a wedge filter affixedto the detector so as to give each column of the array aunique wavelength.  By scanning the array across thescene  in  the  wavelength-dispersion  direction  whilerecording a series of images, each part of the scene iseventually  imaged  in  each  wavelength,  enabling  amulti-spectral image cube to be assembled.The highest spatial resolution LEISA observation ofPluto, at about ~3 km/pixel was obtained by New Horizons at around 10:56 UT 2015 July 14, from a range of47,000 km.  As shown in Fig. 1, the scan ran diagonallyfrom the sunlit limb at mid-northern latitudes, southeastacross  the  mountainous  contact  region  between  thelarge, dark, reddish expanse of Cthulhu Regio1 and theextremely bright and volatile ice-rich Sputnik Planum.These features are so large and conspicuous that theirexistence  had  already been  known from Earth-basedobservations,  enabling  the  encounter  sequence  to  bedesigned to reveal more about them.Results:  Maps of Pluto's various ices species wereconstructed from the LEISA observation by computingintegrated areas, band depth ratios, or correlations withtemplate spectra as described in [2].  These maps (e.g.,Fig. 2) trace specific materials across Pluto's surface ina qualitative sense.  More quantitative abundance mapsawait pixel-by-pixel analysis of the individual spectra,using radiative transfer models to account for multiplescattering and particle  size effects,  a  computationallyexpensive process (see [3]).Fig. 2 shows H2O and CH4 ice maps of the regionaround Elliot  crater  and  Virgil  Fossa,  in  comparisonwith an albedo map based on New Horizons LORRI1 All feature names throughout this abstract and the associated talk are informal.Fig.  1. False  color  image  of  the  P_LEISA_HIRES  scanconstructed from the first few principal components computed from LEISA data.  All feature names are informal.Fig.  2. Compositional  maps  of  a  300  km  wide  regionaround Elliot crater and Virgil Fossa.  North is up.2284.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
images  [4,5,6].   The  crater  is  strikingly depleted  inH2O, while the fossa is rich in that material, which isnon-volatile  at  Pluto surface  temperatures.   The  surrounding plains also show H2O ice absorption but lessso to the north of Elliot, where the H2O gives way toCH4 ice.  The flat floor of Elliot is very rich in CH4, asare the north-facing portion of its inner rim and centralpeak.Another interesting region appears  in Fig. 3,  withmaps of albedo, H2O, CH4, and highly volatile N2 ice.In  dark  Cthulhu Regio  at  lower  left,  H2O ice  has  apatchy distribution, and there is little or no N2 ice.  CH4occurs  there,  but  mostly just  on  north-facing slopes.No H2O is seen in Sputnik Planum, but that area is richin both N2 and CH4.  Interestingly, the N2 ice absorption in Sputnik does not appear to be spatially uniform(unfortunately this is a noisier map owing to the weakness of the N2 absorption band at 2.15 µm).  A regionjust north of Baré Montes shows particularly strong N2absorption.   An  unnamed  crater  with  a  bright  floorstands out at upper left.  The bright floor material lookssimilar to Sputnik Planum, rich in both CH4 and N2.Despite  its  low  visible  wavelength  albedo,  BaréMontes  shows reasonably strong H2O ice  absorptionand little CH4 or N2.  H2O ice was expected in mountainous  regions,  since  the  more  volatile  ices  are  tooductile for large, enduring edifices to be built of them.But its distribution in the various mountain ranges inthis  region  is  curious,  tending to  be  associated  withsouth-facing slopes.  It  appears to be masked by CH4ice on north-facing slopes.At mid-northern latitudes, as in Fig. 4, the distributions of CH4 and H2O ices often appear anti-correlated.Many craters show bright rims with strong CH4 absorption, while their dark floors show H2O absorption.  Apossible explanation for this CH4 distribution is that itpreferentially condenses from the atmosphere on topographic highs and regions with high albedos.This co-occurrence of H2O absorption with visuallydark  regions  is  seen  widely across  Pluto,  with BaréMontes and Cthulhu Regio providing good examples inFig. 3.  It  is unclear whether the H2O plus tholins responsible for darkening the crater floors actually accumulate there (perhaps arriving as wind-blown dust), orare generally representative of Pluto's subsurface materials but are seen to outcrop only in regions such ascrater  floors  where  they  are  least  likely  to  becomecoated by volatile ices, owing to the local thermal environment.References:   [1] Reuter  et  al.  (2008)  SSR, 140,129-154. [2] Grundy et al. (2016) Science, submitted.[3] Protopapa et al. (2016) this conference.  [4] Chenget al. (2008) SSR, 140, 189-215. [5] Stern et al. (2015)Science,  350,  292.  [6] Moore  et  al.  (2016)  Science,submitted. Fig.  3. Region  extending  from  Viking  Terra  in  easternCthulhu  Regio  at  lower  left  to  Sputnik Planum at  upperright.   The  mountainous  region  at  upper  center  is  BaréMontes, with Zheng-He Montes near the top of the frameand Hilary Montes at lower right.  Each pane is 350 km talland north is up.Fig. 4. Region extending from Bird Planitia north to Dumuzi  and Inanna Fossae.   Each pane is 400  km tall  andnorth is up.2284.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
