2287.PDF
2015 CANMARS MSR ANALOGUE MISSION: GIS AND MAPPING RESULTS.  Z. R. Morse1, B. H. Choe1, L. L. Tornabene1, G. R. Osinski1,2, 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration, Department of Earth Science, University of Western Ontario, London ON, Canada. zmorse@uwo.ca bchoe@uwo.ca 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London ON, Canada.  Introduction:  The 2015 CanMars MSR Analogue Mission was a Mars Sample Return Analogue Mission carried out in partnership between the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd. (MDA), and the Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX) at the University of Western Ontario, as part of the NSERC CREATE project “Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration” (create.uwo.ca) [1]. The Mars Exploration Science Rover (MSER) – a Mars rover prototype developed by the CSA and MDA [1] – was deployed at an undisclosed site in Utah (i.e., unknown to the Mission Control and Science team based in London, Ontario). As part of this mission, the GIS/Mapping team was responsible for: 1) A pre-mission remote sensing analysis of the region and 2) syn- and post-mission geologic mapping  of the region. Gis / Mapping worked closely with the  GIS / Localization team [2] to synthesize the results from both the remote sensing data analysis and information collected in-situ from the rover suite of instruemnts that were used to characterize the local geology and geomorphology. Multi-spectral remote sensing data analysis of the target region: Visible and infrared multi-spectral signatures of the target region, including our landing site, were invesitgated using Landsat8 OLI and ASTER data provided to the science team.       Figure 1. a) Landsat8 OLI band ratio colour composite (left, R; 6/7, G; 5/4, B; 4/2) and b) MNF transformed ASTER TIR colour composite (right, R; MNF band1, G; band2, B; band3). Methods. In order to define distinct spectral units, a RGB colour composite was produced from Landsat8 OLI by applying band ratios of band6/band7 (sensitive to carbonate/sulfate/clay), band5/band4 (vegetation), and band4/band2 (ferric iron) (Fig. 1a). Strong iron oxidized surface features are dominant in the eastern areas, while carbonate, sulfate, and/or clay signatures are observed in the middle and western areas. Vegitation appears to have a minimal contribution to these units which is corroborated by a 60-cm high-resolution colour image and in situ images collected by MESR cameras. Minimum noise fraction (MNF) transform method, which is a type of principal component analysis (PCA), was applied to the ASTER thermal infrared (TIR) and short-wavelength infrared (SWIR) data to define distinct spectral units [3]. Based on the MNF transformed ASTER TIR colour composite, we defined four distinct colour units; dark blue, pink, green, and cyan (Fig. 1b). Image-derived spectra were extracted and analyzed from each unit, by matching their TIR emissivity and SWIR reflectance spectra with a mineral spectral library provided by USGS [4] . The representative spectra from each unit were averaged and then matched based using the spectral angle mapper (SAM) and spectral feature fitting (SFF) algorithms [5].       Results. The dark blue unit shows a strong absorption feature at TIR band 11 (8.6µm), which is best matched with a lab spectra of gypsum, and is consistent with the SWIR spectrum for this unit and the results from the Landsat analysis. The pink, green, and cyan units were well fitted to quartz (based on absorptions at band 10 (8.2µm) and 12 (9.0µm)), Fe-smectite (absorption at band 12 (9.0µm)), and calcite (absorption at band 14 (11.3µm)), respectively.  For SWIR reflectance spectra, most of the units show similar absorption features at band 6 (2.2µm) and 8 (2.3µm). Based on the absorption features at TIR and SWIR, band ratio images were produced to represent the presence and concentration of minerals such as gypsum, silica, carbonate, and clays (possibly smectite) (Fig. 2) [6]. The preliminary spectral mapping contributed relevant geological information of our landing site, from which we anticipated the type of rocks and landforms that the rover would encounter.  Figure 2. Band ratio image examples. (a) (10+12)/11 (gypsum), (b) 13/12 (silica), (c) 13/14 (carbonate), and (d) (5+7)/6 (sericite/muscovite/illite/smectite). 2287.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Syn- and Post-Mission Geologic Mapping: During the mission, the GIS team began work correlating data collected on the ground with remote sensing data to produce geologic maps of the landing site and surrounding region  Methods. The team was provided with several remote sensing products prior to the start of the mission.  These products included a high-resolution 60 cm/pixel QuickBird colour image of the landing ellipse area and a 10-m digital elevation model of the same area.  The high-res color image served as the base for GIS mapping.  It is important to note that since the in-sim team did not know the location of MESR, the satellite image provided is not referenced to any established datum.  As such, the scale provided on any maps produced is constructed relative to the known size of the overall landing ellipse or, on smaller scales, the exact distance traversed by the rover. To produce the final geologic map of the landing region the GIS team used ArcMap a part of the ARC GIS suite [7].  Polygons were drawn to encapsulate like geologic units, grouped together based on similar morphology, similar topographic location, and similar composition based on contact science conducted by MESR. [8,9] as seen in the high-resolution satellite image.  There are 5 units distinguished in this final map:  1) the base level material on which the rover landed, 2) the main red and white layered units of positive topographic features in the area, including the feature named Jotunheim [2] and the hills to the west of the landing site, 3) the cap rock above the layered units, 4) the white colored loose material traversed by the rover in the final days of mission operations, and 5) a bright orange material unique to a region west of the landing site and not traversed or directly observed by MESR.  Stream flow patterns were also carefully traced and included in the final geologic map. Results. The map produced clearly shows the distribution of the 5 specified geologic units throughout the landing region (Fig. 3).  The more resistant cap rock unit tops the hills in the centre of the landing area as well as the hills to the west.  The white and orange materials occur in isolated patches and appear to be associated with what appears to be the outflow regions of the streams in the vicinity.  Mapping the stream paths shows that the predominant flow direction in the region is to the north and west.  Highlighting the flow patterns also shows areas in which channels cut into the hillsides and where fans form and distribute sediments. Discussion. The main layered unit was shown by data from other intsruments on MESR [8,9] to be composed of alternating layers of red and white colored sediment that vary in thickness and are loosely consolidated. These individual layers were grouped and mapped together based up their similar composition and depositional environment.  Mapping this succession of sedimentary layers as one unit allows for the easy visualization of their distribution in a regional context and their relationship with the capping unit.  Furthermore, some of the individual layers are so thin that they would not be visible on the scale of the full geologic map.   The distribution of the geologic units compared with the highlighted stream flow patterns shows the effects of fluvial erosion on the resistant cap and the underlying soft sediments.  The main channel of a stream crosses locations where the cap rock and sediment package have been eroded.  Regions were channels have formed in the hillsides are also associated with the regional drainage pattern.  The distribution of sediments is also dependent on the stream flow patterns.  Accumulation of the white and bright orange sediments appear correlated with locations where the streams fan our and form fan-shaped deposits.   Figure 3. Geologic map of the field site for MESR operations and  the surrounding region.  References: [1] Osinski et al. (2015) LPS XLVII. This conf. [2] Christoffersen P., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, (this conference) [3] Green et al. (1988) IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., 26, 65-74. [4] Clark et al. (1993) USGS digital spec. lib. [5] Kruse et al. (1993) Remote Sens. of Environ., 44, 145-163. [6] Van der Meer et al. (2012), Int. J. Applied Earth Obs. Geoinfo. 14, 112128. [7] ESRI 2011. ArcGIS Desktop: Release 10. Redlands CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute. [8] Caudill C. M., et al.  (2016) LPSC XLVII, (this conference). [9] Ryan C. H., Haid T., et al. (2016) LPSC XLVII, (this conference).  Acknowledgments: This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada’s CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency. We would like to acknowledge Hans van ’t Woud of Blackshore and its partners, including  European Space imaging and EuroMoonMars research for the use of the colour Quickbird image that covers the analogue mission site.  2287.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
