 TESTING THE AXIAL DYNAMO HYPOTHESIS FOR THE MOON BY MODELING THE DIRECTION OF CRUSTAL MAGNETIZATION. Joana S. Oliveira1 and Mark A. Wieczorek1, 1 Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris, Université Paris Diderot, 75205 Paris. (oliveira@ipgp.fr). Introduction Magnetic field maps of the Moon show that there are strong magnetic anomalies of crustal origin distributed heterogeneously across the lunar surface [1,2]. However, the origin of the field that magnetized the crust is still controversial, with some proposing that the Moon once had a global dipolar magnetic field generated by a core dynamo [35], and others suggesting a more exotic origin related to impact events [6]. If the Moon possessed a core dynamo in its past, it would likely be largely dipolar with its symmetry axis aligned with the lunar rotation axis. In this case the direction of crustal magnetization would vary with planetary latitude, just as on Earth. We test the hypothesis that the Moon once had an axial, dipolar magnetic field by modeling the direction of crustal magnetization spacecraft-derived magnetic field data. From the direction of magnetization, we calculate the corresponding "paleopole", which we define as the north geomagnetic pole of a predominantly dipolar core-generated field when the anomaly was formed. If the paleopoles all correspond to the present-day geographic poles, this would be consistent with a dipolar magnetic field generated by a core dynamo. If the paleopoles all cluster about an axis that is offset from the current rotation axis, this would also be consistent with a core-generated dipolar field, but with a subsequent episode of true polar wander [1]. Alternatively, if the paleopoles do not cluster, then this could either be a result of the Moon having a predominantly quadrupolar field, or of an impact origin. Previous studies have attempted to investigate the origin and direction of crustal magnetization by utilizing simplifying assumptions about the location and geometry of magnetic sources. These models have included point dipoles [1], circular disks [7], and elliptical prisms [8], and were often applied to simple, isolated, magnetic anomalies. The results of such studies are highly non-unique, and are critically dependent on the validity of the assumed source geometry. As most lunar magnetic anomalies are complex, these approaches are not appropriate for large portions of the lunar crust. In this work, we utilize an approach originally developed by Parker [9] that largely bypasses the non-uniqueness associated with specifying the geometry of the magnetic sources. In this method, the strength of magnetization is allowed to vary with position, and it is only assumed that the direction of crustal magnetization is constant in direction within the crust. Method We make use of the approach developed by [9] that was previously used to study seamount magnetization on Earth. To date, this approach has not yet been applied to any other planetary body. In this method, many dipoles are placed over a localized region on the surface, all with the same common direction, M(si) = m̂ m(si), where m̂ is the direction of magnetization, and where m(si) is the dipole moment at position si. It can be shown that the distribution of unidirectional dipoles on the surface of the planet is mathematically equivalent to unidirection dipoles placed at arbitrary depths within the crust. The only assumption of the model is that when the region acquired a remnant magnetization, the main field was constant in direction. The magnetic field d at observation point j is given by dj = ∑Nd i=1 gj(si)m(si), j = 1, ..., No with, gj(si) = µ0 4π ∑Nd i=1 (3m̂·(rj−si)r̂j ·(rj−si) rj−si 5 − m̂·r̂j rj−si 3) where No and Nd are the number of observations and surface dipoles, and rj and si are the vector positions of the observations and dipoles relative to a fixed origin, respectively. We emphasize that no assumptions about the intensity of magnetized sources, source geometry, or statistical distributions are made, which is the main strength of the method. The above two equations can be written in matrix form d = G(m̂)m where the matrix G depends upon the assumed direction of magnetization m̂, d is a vector of the observations, and m is a vector that contains the (positive) magnitudes of the surface dipoles. We solve for m using the method of non-negative least squares [10], and as discussed by [9], if there areNo magnetic field observations, a maximum ofNo of theNd surface dipoles will be non-zero. The non-negative least squares approach naturally finds which dipoles are non-zero, as well as their intensity. For each direction of magnetization, we invert the above matrix equation, determine the best fit magnetic field and the rms misfit between the observations and model. The magnetization direction is converted to the north magnetic paleopole, and we then plot the model misfit as a function of paleopole direction. This modeling approach can give rise to strong edge effects, where large model magnetic anomalies are present exterior to the region being modeled. To minimize these effects, we place surface dipoles within a circle of angular radius θd, and calculate the model misfit within a circle of larger angular radius θo. Results For our inversions, we use the global gridded magnetic field maps of [2] at 30 km altitude that are based on both Lunar Prospector and Kaguya magnetometer observations. These maps have a spatial resolution of 15 km, whereas maps developed at the surface have a higher spatial resolution of 6 km. Three different magnetic anomalies are considered for our preliminary inversions: Reiner-γ (58.3◦E, 7.5◦N), Hayford (171.9◦E, 13.4◦N) and Descartes (16.0◦E, 10.7◦S). Figure 1 shows the results of Parker's inversion applied to those anomalies. In the left hand column, we plot the observations, the locations of the observations used in the inversion, and the two circles that enclose the observation points and surface dipoles. The middle column shows the best fitting modeled field, along with the points where dipoles were placed on the surface. The right hand column shows the  5˚ 10˚ 15˚ 20˚ 25˚ −20˚ −15˚ −10˚ −5˚ 0˚ Br Observations, nT 5˚ 10˚ 15˚ 20˚ 25˚ Br Model, nT 5˚ 10˚ 15˚ 20˚ 25˚ Magnetic Moment, Am2 180˚ −175˚ −170˚ −165˚ 5˚ 10˚ 15˚ 20˚ 180˚ −175˚ −170˚ −165˚ 180˚ −175˚ −170˚ −165˚ −70˚ −65˚ −60˚ −55˚ −50˚ −45˚ −5˚ 0˚ 5˚ 10˚ 15˚ 20˚ −70˚ −65˚ −60˚ −55˚ −50˚ −45˚ −70˚ −65˚ −60˚ −55˚ −50˚ −45˚ −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 02 46 810nT 1011 1012 Am2 Figure 1: (From left to right) Observed radial magnetic field, the best-fit magnetic field, and the magnetic moments of the retained dipoles in the inversion for the (top) Reiner-γ, (middle) Hayford and (bottom) Descartes anomalies. For each anomaly, the data points and the locations of dipoles used in the inversion are denoted by dots in the left and middle diagrams, respectively. locations of the non-zero magnitude surface dipoles and their intensities. In these simulations, a distance of 0.5◦ was used to separate the two circles that enclose the surface dipoles and observations. The misfit values (at 30 km altitude) obtained for Reinerγ, Hayford and Descartes are 0.57, 0.90, 0.48 nT, respectively, which is smaller than the 1.5 nT estimated uncertainty of the magnetic field maps [2]. The right hand column in Figure 1 shows that most of the retained dipoles have low magnetization intensities, and the strongest dipole moments are generally located where the strongest magnetic fields are found. The global misfit as a function of the north paleopole location are computed for each studied anomaly, and the results are shown for Reiner-γ in Figure 2. 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50nT Figure 2: Misfit as a function of paleopole location for the Reiner-γ anomaly. The white circle indicates the best-fit paleopole position, and the white curve is the 1 nT contour. The best-fit paleopole positions obtained for the Reinerγ, Hayford and Decartes anomalies are (176◦W, 82◦N), (66◦W , 82◦S) and (99◦W, 19◦S), respectively. Two of these anomalies give paleopole positions close to the actual rotation axis, which is supportive of a global core-generated magnetic field in the past. Though the best fit paleopole location for Descartes is inconsistent with an axial dipole field, we have not yet evaluated the uncertainty associated with our paleopole locations. Conclusions The paleopole positions for the Reiner-γ and Descartes anomalies are slightly closer to the lunar rotation axis in comparison to the results obtained by [1] who modeled these anomalies by a single dipole. For the Hayford anomaly we obtain a difference in paloepole latitude of 20◦ with respect to [1], with our paleopole position being closer to the rotation axis. Two of the three anomalies investigated in this study have paleopole positions close to the lunar rotation axis, which could be taken as supporting evidence for a past core-generated dynamo field aligned with the rotation axis. Though the third anomaly is apparently inconsistent with an axial dipolar magnetic field, we have not yet estimated the uncertainty of the paloepole location, and it remains possible that the Moon might have had an episode of true polar wander in its past [e.g. 1]. We are currently applying this technique to a larger number of lunar anomalies that should help us resolve whether the lunar magnetic field was predominantly dipolar or not. References [1] Takahashi F. et al. (2014) Nat. Geosci. [2] Tsunakawa, H. et al. (2015) JGR Planets. [3] Shea E. K. et al. (2012) Sci. [4] Weiss B. P. and Tikoo S. M. (2014) Sci. [5] Laneuville M. et al. (2014) EPSL [6] Hood L. L. and Artemieva N. A. (2008) Icarus [7] Hood L. L. (2011) Icarus [8] Arkani-Hamed J. and Boutin D. (2014) Icarus. [9]Parker R. (1991) JGR. [10] Lawson C. L. and Hanson R. J. (1974) Series in Automatic Computation. 