2293.PDF
Seismic Q of the Moon Re-estimated from Combined Spectrum of Apollo LP and SP Seismometers.  T. Kawamura1 , P. Lognonné1, J. F. Blanchette-Guertin1, and  M. Drilleau1, 1Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris/ University of Paris Diderot (kawamura@ipgp.fr).   Introduction:  Seismic Q that defines the inelastic attenuation of the wave propagation is an important parameter to evaluate quantitatively the seismic energy release and seismic activity. While some studies from 70's and 80's gave some evaluation of the seismic Q on the Moon using the Apollo data, the vertical variation of seismic Q with respect to the depth is not well resolved[e.g. 1] . In previous studies, spectral analyses were performed to estimate seismic Q. The spectral analyses suffered from limited frequency band of the Apollo seismometers. To improve the estimation, we need to expand the frequency band and investigate both the long and short period feature of spectra.  Method: For better estimation of attenuation factor Q, we expand the frequency band of our spectral analyses by using both long(LP) and short period(SP) seismometers of Apollo. Apollo seismic station had three axes long period (0.35-1Hz) and a vertical short period (1-10Hz) seismometer. The frequency bands cover different range with some overlap. Thus the LP vertical and SP vertical is observing the same ground motion at different frequency range which enables us to estimate a continuous spectrum covering both frequency range of LP and SP through least square methods. Let d(f), si(f), Hi(f) be ground displacement, signal recorded with the seismometer and transfer function of the instrument as functions of frequency. "i" should be either LP or SP. We estimate d(f) by minimizing I that is defined as  I = sLP f( )−HLP f( )d f( )2σ LP2∫         + sSP f( )−HSP f( )d f( )2σ SP2 df (1) σi is the noise level of each instrument. Figure 1 shows an example of combined spectra. Note that this approach is only possible at Station 15 and 16 because of the malfunction of SP vertical at Station 12 and LP vartical at Station 14.  Observed spectra includes various components including source time function and attenuation. The observed spectrum can be model in the following manner. d f( ) = Ω01+ f fc( )2!"#$%&1 2 × exp −π ftQ!"#$%&×RLocal           RRayPath × Ascatter + noise(2) The first term represents the source time function that is defined with corner frequency fc and the DC value of the spectrum Ω0(for the detailed discussion of the source time function please refer to Kawamura et al. (submitted)). The second term is the attenuation that is characterized with Q, which will be investigated in this study. The t is the travel time between the source and the station. Thus the Q represents the net Q value for the whole ray path. When we assume a layered model for the lunar internal structure and define the Q and t within each layer as Qi and ti, exp −π ftQ"#$%&'= exp −π f tiQi∑"#$%&' . In our study, we assume that the Q is constant and frequency dependency was neglected. There are other factors such as the effect of scattering, local station function or energy loss within the ray path but this will not be investigated in detail in this study. We divide the spectra into two components, which are event dependent component and sourcestation dependent component. The former is the source time function and the rest can be regarded as sourcestation dependent component. In this study, we assume that only the attenuation is frequency dependent within the source-station dependent component.  We regard this as a background spectrum with respect to the source time function but the estimation of background spectrum is the main target of this study. We mainly focus on deep moonquakes in these analyses. Since the deep moonquakes occurs periodically at certain source regions we have multiple events with the same set of source and station. This will enable us to stack the spectra to improve the estimation of the background spectrum. We start from tentative source time function for each event, which is estimated by fitting the source time function to the data. Then we removed the source time function from the spectra to have the background spectra for each event. Then the background spectra were stacked to reduce the noise level. This will give us better estimation of background spectrum compared to the estimation with a single event. Then the background spectra were removed from the original raw spectra to re-estimate the source 2293.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
time function. This process were carried out iteratively until the result converges to improve the estimation of the source time functions and the background spectra (Figure 2). As it was mentioned before, we assume that the only frequency dependent component within the background spectrum is the attenuation term. Thus, by assuming the travel time and fitting the attenuation model to the background spectrum, we can estimate seismic Q for a set of station and source region. The stacking method is only valid for deep moonquakes but estimation of seismic Q is also possible for shallow moonquakes. In our future work, we will perform the same analyses with shallow moonquakes. Instead of estimating the background spectrum through stacking, we need to invert for the source time function and the seismic Q at the same time. This will leave larger uncertainties in the Q compared with the estimation with deep moonquakes and this needs to be taken into account when we perform further analyses with the obtained set of Q values as we discuss in the following section. Results and Discussion: We performed preliminary analyses for A01, A06 and A07 deep moonquake nests. We fixed the source location to those defined in a previous study[2]. The result is summarized at Table 1. The results we obtained is relatively low compared to previous estimation. Our results still supports the idea that it is high Q on the Moon compared to the Earth. It is important to note that our estimation varies with the location and velocity model we use. To reevaluate the seismic Q model of the Moon, not only the attenuation but also source location needs to be reestimated.   Given that we have a new gravity and topography model from GRAIL[3], re-evaluation of source location and seismic model is now in progress[4]. They perform new Markov Chain Monte Carlo inversions of  (i) 1-D lunar crustal and upper mantle velocity models and (ii) 3-D lateral crustal thickness models anchored by crustal thicknesses under the Apollo stations and the artificial and natural impact sites. Results from shallow and deep moonquake will also be integrated to the inversion and our result can also be integrated into the inversion to estimate the seismic Q model of the Moon.  Future Works: The first aim of this study is to prepare a data set of seismic Q for various sets of seismic sources and stations, including both deep and shallow moonquakes. The data set will be integrated to the joint inversion of seismic and gravity data and construct a seismic Q model of the Moon. References: [1] Nakamura, Y. and Koyama, J. (1982), JGR, 87, No B6, 4855-4861. [2] Nakamura, Y., (2005) JGR, 110, E01001, doi:10.1029/2004JE002332 [3] Wieczorek et al. (2013) Science, 339, 671-675, doi:10.1126/science.123153 [4] Blanchette-Guertin et al., (2015) LPS XXXXVI, Abstract #1867.  Figure 1 Combined spectrum of Apollo LP and SP seismometer. Both the original LP and SP spectra is also plotted for comparison. The black line shows the noise level of the LP and SP.  Figure  2 Background spectrum estimated with stacking method. The black line shows all the spectra from A06 deep moonquake events observed at Station 16 and the blue line shows the stacked spectrum. Table Estimated Seismic Q for 3 deep moonquake source regions.  Station 15 Station 16 A01 3057 5118 A06 4653 4500 A07 3522 3106 2293.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
