 LUNAR POLAR SITES SELECTION AND ROVER TRAVERSE PLANNING FOR A STUDY ON VOLATILES AND ICES.  O. M. Kamps1,3, J. D. Flahaut2, B. H. Foing3,4 , 1 Faculty of Geosciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands (o.m.kamps@students.uu.nl), 2 Laboratoire de Géologie, École normale supérieure, Lyon, France, 3 ESA/ESTEC, Noordwijk (bernard.foing@esa.int) , The Netherlands, 4 Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands  Introduction:  After almost 40 years without lunar landers the interest for the Moon is back. Especially after the anouncement of the director-general Jan Wörner that Europe aims for a permanent manned habitat on the Moon. First a lot of questions should be answered before such a mission could be realized. One of the major topics is the existence and availability of water ice, which has never been studied in-situ. Experiments from Prospector, Clementine, Chandrayaan-1 and LRO already indicated the presence of water ices on the Moon [1]. At the moment ESA is studying the possibility to do a tele-operated mission on the Moon [3]. As internship project a method for planning a rover traverse for this mission is proposed. Here we assume  the mission aims to study volatiles and ices. Sample return was added as addidtional goal for the teleoperated mission. Eventually two traverses are proposed near the North and South Pole of the Moon. Method: The traverse planning and data processing is done in ArcGIS. The used data were similar to the data used for the LPI-JSC Lunar Exploration Summer Intern Program [2]. This contained mainly data from the LRO, Prospector and maps from USGS, which were used to assess interesting regions and accessibility for a rover. The selection of interesting sites for a rover traverse can be divided in two stages. The first stage compares areas to its scientific interest. This is done by defining regions of interest (ROI's) which surround places which have extremely low temperatures inside their PSR. Extremely low was defined as the sublimation temperature of CO2, which is assumed to be 54K at lunar atmospheric pressure [4]. This resulted in multiple sites on both North as South Pole which were compared on multiple aspects like temperature, hydrogen content and its epoch classification according to the USGS. Although the epoch might not be related to a volatile mission it was thought to be  a good addition since it would be a sample return mission, it would be beneficial if sites were sampled from Fig 1. Amundsen crater map and proposed traverse considering slope and temperature constraints    another epoch than sampled by Apollo and Luna landing missions.  The second stage of the selection compares the ROI's on the accessibility of the PSR's, and the extremely cold parts in particular. The slope was assumed to be the most limiting factor for accessibility for a rover and was the input for the automatic rover traverse planning. For this study it was assumed that slopes lower than 20o would be accessible to rove, and lower than 5o was suitable as landing site. Other assumptions were made to select a landing site: the size was defined as 1km in diameter, it should be inside an accessible area for roving, and (partially) illuminated. The eventual rover traverse planning was done by using tools in ArcGIS. As input for this tool, the starting point was defined as the selected landing site, destination is an area inside the PSR with extremely low temperatures. In between a scientific interesting site was chosen to complicate the traverse. This was chosen by picking a location where the temperature difference (Tmax-Tmin measured by Diviner) was higher than 150 Kelvin. These sites would be interesting to study processes related to volatile transport. The last input for the tool was the slope map which was chosen as the most important as limiting factor for rover mobility. Landing site, site of interest (SOI), and destination where manually chosen from the prepared maps and selected for the automatic rover traverse planning.  Results: In total fourteen regions of interest where selected as potentially interesting sites to plan a rover traverse (figure 2). This selection was based on the epoch and the minimum temperatures of the regions.  Testing the accessibility proved to be beneficial because this resulted in the final selection (green in figure 2). Eventually there was chosen to plan a traverse in Amundsen and Rozhdestvenskiy.  We show some of the prepared maps using Amundsen as an example in figure 1. The upper left picture shows the traverse planning in black as calculated in ArcGIS, the green, yellow, and red dots indicate respectively the landing site, site of interest, and destination. The upper right figure shows the temperature variations, and the permanent shaded region in dark grey. The lowest picture is a 3-dimensional visualization of the crater where the color indicates the slope, and the transparent areas have slope larger than 20o.  Although it is hard to see in the 3D image the more difficult parts (steeper slopes), visualized in yellow and orange, are automatically avoided in the traverse planning. Instead of proposing a straight line it has found the easiest path by taking the slope into account. The site of interest is a little uphill on the central peak of Amundsen where the temperature conditions variate up to 220 Kelvin. Discussion and conclusion: Comparing both Rozhdestvesnkiy and Amundsen resulted in a preference for Amundsen as landing and roving area. Amundsen showed more options for landing and studying area's with high temperature differences. The temperature differences were not only higher but also more accessible in Amundsen compared to Rozhdestvenskiy. However, more research should be done to compare both craters by using more scientific data. The spatial distribution of hydrogen content can be studied by LEND, but also radar data from Clementine or Chandrayaan-1, M3, albedo and photographs could be used. The tools in ArcGIS gave a good result for a rover traverse. As future work for the traverse planning it is proposed to make a more advanced map with more aspects which could limit the rover traverse, for example the surface roughness. It is also possible to make more accurate and better motivated assumptions for landing sites and rover mobility. As follow up it would be nice to make a time schedule, propose best date for landing and define the possible payload which could be used for a mission near the poles. References:  [1] Basilevsky A.T., Abdrakhimov A.M,  and Dorofeeva, V.A. (2012) Astronicheskii Vestnik, 46, 99118. [2]  Kring, D.A., Durda, D.D (2012) http://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/CLSE-landingsite-study/, [3] M. Landgraf et al. (2015), LEAG 2015, 2039 [4] Zhang J.A., Paige D.A. (2010), Geophysical Research Letters, 47(3) Fig 2. Selected and unselected regions of interest   http://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/CLSE-landing-site-study/ http://www.lpi.usra.edu/exploration/CLSE-landing-site-study/