2420.PDF
AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION ON THE YIELD OF HAYABUSA2 SAMPLER SYSTEM USING DIFFERENT GRAIN-SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS.  Duy-Anh Doan1, Eri Tatsumi2, Seiji Sugita2, 1MIT Dept. of Earth, Atmospheric Planet. Sci.. Email: ddoan@mit.edu, 2Univ. of Tokyo, Dept. of Earth Planet. Sci.   Introduction:  HAYABUSA2 is an asteroid sample return mission by JAXA, whose main objective is to collect and return materials from Near-Earth Asteroid Ryugu (1999 JU3) to Earth. Samples are collected by shooting a bullet to the asteroid surface and catching the resulting impact ejecta with a sampling device [1]. The relationship between mass yield and surface conditions is very important for accurately estimatimg the sample mass yield. Yano et. al. [2] has performed experimental simulations with bedrock (monolith) and regolith targets under both 1G and microgravity conditions using a sampler model for HAYABUSA and found out that 100 mg to several grams of samples would be obtained per shot. However, monolith and regolith surfaces may not be accurate representations for small (sub-km) asteroid surfaces. such as Ryugu. Close-up images from encounter of HAYABUSA (the predecessor of HAYABUSA2) revealed that asteroid 25143 Itokawa is covered by numerous boulders, coarse pebbles and finer grains; its surface is most accurately described by a power-law distribution of grain sizes [3]. Furthermore, the surface of Ryugu presumably lies somewhere between a thick-dust regolith and a rock/boulder/cmsized, gravel-dominated surface similar to 25143 Itokawa [4]. Thus, consideration of various possible surface conditions of asteroid Ryugu is needed to obtain a robust estimate for the mass yield of the mission. Because HAYABUSA2 has already been launched on Dec. 3, 2014, the sampler system cannot be changed, but its detailed operation plans can be further improved based on in-situ observation results and experiments on the ground. The decision on where to touch down on Ryugu will depend strongly on expected sample yield from candidate touchdown sites. Thus, accurate sample yield estimate with the fixed sampler system is highly valuable. Furthermore, since such bullet-style sampling system may be used for future small-body mission because of its robustness, characterization of physical processes associated with this impact phenomena are of great importance. To meet these needs, we conducted a series of impact experiments using a HAYABUSA2 sampler model and a variety of coarse grain targets in this study. Experiments and Results: We mixed 6 different sizes of spherical glass beads, equally spread over the range from 50 μm  - 10 mm, with mixing mass ratio of each size bin matching targets with different power-law constants α, ranging from 2.0 to 5.0. Here the cumulative number of grains N(>D) is given by N(>D) = No(D/Do)-α where Do is the reference grain size. Smaller α means coarser surface. The experiments are performed with a ½-scale sampler model and 200-m/s 0.76-g projectiles, in a vacuum chamber at the University of Tokyo to keep the pressure below 50 Pa. A NAC high-speed camera is used to capture the ejecta collection scenes at 5000 frames per second (Fig. 1). The impact crater shapes are rather similar across different power-law constants α, with average diameter and depth of 130 mm and 20 mm, respectively. However, for the case where α = 2.0, the general grains are too large to measure the crater dimensions (Fig. 1). Fig 1. Left: Impact targets for the cases α = 3 and α = 2. Right: A slice of the process, showing ejecta rising from the surface (below) toward the collection device (above)  Fig 2. Total mass yield as a function of α. Arrows indicate mass yields below our detection threshold (1mg). Black circles indicate our experiments. Red triangles and blue squares indicate experiments by [5].   Figure 2 clearly shows that that mass yield increases with power-law constant α. The data scatter is large for α < 3.5, with differences reaching even an order of magnitude. A possible cause for this large scatter may be the rough nature of the target surfaces for lower α 2420.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
values; there are more large-size grains, and the point of contact between the projectile and the surface can vary significantly. Then, the projectile may hit a largesize grain on the surface or immediately below the surface and be deflected, which results in smaller yield, or it may make contact in a region of small-size grains, resulting in higher yield. For α > 3.5, the scatter among experiments is much smaller most likely because the surface is covered with mostly fine grains. It is also noticeable that the increase in mass yield as a function of α stops at α ≈ 4.0. This phenomenon happens because for large α, the surface is dominated by smallest grains; it could be approximated very well by a singlesize distribution, and results should not differ considerably across experiments. Overall, our results, which agree well with previous results by [2] that the expected mass yield is several hundred milligrams to several grams per shot, could be well-fitted by an empirical formula: where m is the mass yield, measured in mg.   Then, we proceed to analyze the size distribution of the collected materials. Although no largest grains (10 mm) were collected in all experiments, the secondlargest grain (3 mm) take up a substantial portion of the yield. The mass yield of 3-mm glass beads is the greatest in the region 2.75 < α < 3.5. The variation among experiments in the yield of large-size grains, ranging from 0 - 240 mg, may explain the wide spread in the data in intermediate-α region mentioned above.   Fig. 3. The size of the circles indicates the amount of 3-mm glass beads collected as a percentage of the total mass yield. The mass yield of 3-mm glass beads is the greatest when α is in the range 2.75 - 3.5.  Comparison with Earlier Works: Previously two sets of similar experiments were performed with mixtures of two different sizes of glass beads [5]. The first combination is 710 - 1000 μm and 5 - 8 mm glass beads, and the second one is 250 - 355 μm and 5 - 8 mm glass beads. (Fig. 2) The experimental procedures and equipment are the same, which allow us to compare and analyze the similarities and differences between the data sets. The mass yields from our set of experiments are consistently higher than those by [5], for a given value of α. Nevertheless, our data and those by [5] for the combination of 250 - 355 μm and 5 - 8 mm glass beads exhibit notable agreement for large α. The differences in mass yield between this study and [5] can be explained by the number of grain sizes present in the experiments. Impact targets consist only of two sizes of glass beads, whereas this study uses six different sizes. Because larger-size glass beads (5 - 8 mm) by [5] are unable to enter the sampler, the yield comes only from small-size glass beads. On the other hand, our slightly smaller 3-mm glass beads could enter the sampler and contribute significantly to the sample yield. When the proportion of 3-mm glass beads is subtracted from the total mass yield of our experiments, the agreement between our data set and that by [5] glass beads extends down to the region α ≈ 3. Furthermore, for α < 3, the large-size particles begin to dominate the surface. The experiments by [5] do not have any size between 5 mm and 355 μm in diameter. However, our experimens use middle-size glass beads (125 μm, 250 - 355 μm, and 710 - 1000 μm) acting as 'buffers', thus keeping the surface reasonably populated by glass beads whose sizes are small enough to be captured by the sampler. This may explain the remaining difference in mass yields in the region 2.5 < α < 3. The choice of lower cut-off size (i.e. the choice of smallest grain size) is also likely to affect the mass yield of the system. This phenomenon is also supported by data by [5] using two-grain-size mixtures. For a given α, experiments by [5] with the 250 - 355 μm glass beads as the smaller grains gave consistently higher yield than those with the 710 - 1000 μm as the smaller grains, and our experiments with the cut-off size of 50 μm shows higher yield than both. Thus, smaller cut-off sizes lead to higher yields for a given α Conclusion: Experiments with spherical glass beads agree with result by [2] that the yield is from several hundred milligrams to several grams per shot. Finer surfaces (higher α) lead to greater mass yields, although asymptotic behavior begins to appear at α = 4, and mass yield caps at approximately 1.6 g. There is a rather large scatter in the data for α < 3.5 due to the diverse grain sizes on the surface, whereas the spread for α > 3.5 is small as the surface is relatively uniform.   References: [1] Tachibana, S. et. al. (2014), Geochem J., 48, 571-587 [2] Yano, H. et al. (2006) Sci., 312, 1350-1353.  [3] Saito, J. et. al. (2006) Sci., 312, 1341-1344  [4] Müller, T. G. et. al. (2010) Astronom. & Astrophys, 15599. [5] Hagura, K. (2014) Master's Thesis, Univ. Tokyo, pp.84.    2420.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
