2423.PDF
Volcanism and Giant Polygons within Argyre Basin, Mars J.-P. Williams1, A.Pathare2, J. M. Dohm3, R. M. C. Lopes4, and D. L. Buczkowski5, 1Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences,University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA (jpierre@mars.ucla.edu), 2Planetary Science Inst.,Tucson, AZ 85719, USA, 3Earth-Life Science Inst., Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan, 4JetPropulsion Laboratory, Caltech., Pasadena, CA 91109, USA, 5Johns Hopkins University, Applied PhysicsLab, Laurel MD 20723, USA.Introduction: The Argyre impact basin, with a diameter > 1200 km and depth of > 4 km, has experienced a complex geologic history and has been asink for volatiles and other materials [1][2]. The discovery of a large (∼ 60 km diameter) topographicfeature, Argyre Mons, on the floor of the basinwas first reported by Williams et al. [3] and interpreted to be volcanic in origin. More recent analysis of image and topography data in the vicinity of Argye Mons reveals additional features consistent with magma-volatile interaction. This includes additional cones, vents, mounds, and collapse features, many of which are associated withextensional tectonics and fluvial erosion indicativeof melting and/or dewatering of the regolith. Thisrepresents a previously unrecognized aspect of thegeologic history of the basin with astrobiologicalimplications.Volcanism: Argyre Mons consists of a quasicircular rim of high-standing material forming aconic structure with a central, caldera-like pit witha diameter ∼ 25 km (Fig 1). The flanks of the feature extend 10 − 20 km outward from the centraldepression. Steeper sloped, irregular arcuate ridgesat the crest of the north and south flanks, form thehighest elevations and may be possible remnants ofa rim structure. A smaller cone is observed on thenorthern flank ∼ 5 km in diameter, with a circular central depression ∼ 2 km in diameter. A fewadditional examples of features resulting from volcanism and magma-volatile interation near ArgyreMons are shown in Fig 2.Giant polygons: Giant polygons are observed onthe west margin of Argyre Mons (Fig 1) and are confined to a∼ 2000 km2 relatively flat area with an elevation∼ −2600 m. The original extent of the polygons is unclear but their restricted elevation impliesthey formed within a particular stratigraphic horizon within the basin deposits. The polygons arehighly irregular and angular in shape ranging insize ∼ 1 − 10 km with rounded, convex, boundingtrough walls. Trough widths vary with the largertroughs ∼ 500 m wide. Kilometer-scale polygonshave been observed in several locations within thenorthern lowlands with major occurrences in Acidalia Planitia, Chryse Planitia, Utopia Planitia, andFigure 1: Argyre Mons and giant polygons on thefloor of Argyre Basin. Arrow highlights smallercone.Arcadia Planitia [4]. The origin of giant polygonsis unclear though suggested mechanisms of formation generally involve water, either as ice, waterrich sedimentation, or standing bodies of water.Hence, their discovery within Argyre Basin supports the hypothesis that the basin contained largeamounts of water at some point in its past [1].Crater counts: Crater counts were conducted onthe flanks of Argyre Mons and the polygons (Fig3). A model age of ∼ 3 Ga is obtained for bothsurfaces using the Hartmann [5] chronology systemindicating formation of the polygons and ArgyreMons may have been contemporaneous. Dohm etal. [1] compiled crater statistics to evaluate the formation and modification ages of the Argyre rockunits using craters with D > 3 km. The totalcrater population, which included partly buried,degraded, and pristine impact craters, yielded amodel age of ∼ 3.5 Ga. The pristine craters withdistinct rims and ejecta blankets and lacking visible evidence for resurfacing, produced a model ageof ∼ 1.3 Ga indicating a period of major resurfacing occurred during the Middle and Late Amazonian epochs. Argyre Mons and the polygons predate this more recent resurfacing. Many of the superposed craters are highly degraded with a signif2423.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Figure 2: (a) Mounds and ridges within a depression resulting from intrusion of magma into icerich regolith. A saddle in the southwest rim withchannel extending down slope (black arrow) indicates the rim was breached by fluid. (b) Structure∼ 1− 2 km wide with summit depression. (c) Maarformed by intrusion into ice-rich regolith resultingin an explosive eruption.icant deficit of craters D . 300 m. The presence ofseveral pedestal craters indicates that their surfaceshave experienced deflation. A severe lack of craterswith a fresh appearance at any size implies somedeflation of the surface has persisted to at least therecent past.Figure 3: Cumulative crater-size frequency distribution of craters on the flanks of Argyre Mons andthe giant polygons. Model ages derived using [5]and plotted with Craterstats [6].Astrobiology: Evidence for volcanism within thefloor of Argyre Basin, coupled with the basin’swater-rich past, further supported by the giantpolygons, make Argyre a site of astrobiologic significance. The apparent contemporaneous age andlocation of giant polygons and a sizeable volcanicfeature provide the possibility for steep thermaland geochemical gradients available for microbialcolonization.References[1] J. M. Dohm, et al. Geological and hydrological histories of the Argyre province, Mars. Icarus, 253:66–98,2015.[2] H. Hiesinger and J. W. Head. Topography and morphology of the Argyre Basin, Mars: implications forits geologic and hydrologic history. Planet. Space Sci.,50:939–981, 2002.[3] J.-P. Williams, et al. A large vent structure within Argyre Basin, Mars. LPSC, 2807, 2014.[4] D. Z. Oehler. Giant polygons, Mars. EncyclopediaPlanet. Landforms, 2014.[5] W. K. Hartmann. Martian cratering 8: Isochron refinement and the chronology of Mars. Icarus, 174:294–320, 2005.[6] G. G. Michael and G. Neukum. Planetary surface dating from crater size-frequency distribution measurements: Partial resurfacing events and statistical ageuncertainty. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 294:223–229, 2010.2423.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
	Introduction:	Volcanism:	Giant polygons:	Crater counts:	Astrobiology: