2443.PDF
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECT OF ICE COVER ON DELTA MORPHOLOGY: HOW "WARM AND WET" WERE MARTIAN PALEOLAKE ENVIRONMENTS?  Y. Lim1, J. S. Levy2, W. Kim1, and T. A. Goudge1, 1Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of Texas at Austin (yjlim322@utexas.edu), 2University of Texas Institute for Geophysics.   Introduction: Many ice-dominated deltas in the Arctic and Antarctica have a distinctive morphology, characterized by extended, low-slope topsets and an abrupt break in slope at a few meters below sea level where sea ice typically becomes ungrounded [1]. Previous studies of martian deltas model their formation and evolution primarily as a function of variable discharge [2, 3], neglecting the control of the regional climate on resultant morphology of the deposit. In order to further understand the fundamental mechanisms by which ice cover affects delta morphology and test whether martian paleolakes (Fig. 1) formed under "warm and wet" (temperate) or "cold and wet" (similar to the terrestrial Arctic and coastal Antarctic) environmental conditions, we are exploring the effects of ice cover during delta deposition process through 3D flume experiments. These experiments will provide a better understanding of the range of parameters that may have controlled delta development during early martian history, and testable criteria for deltas formed in a "cold and wet" ancient martian climate [4, 5].   Fig. 1. Paleolake delta on Mars (in crater). Notice the very flat topset. HRSC stereo topography-derived slope map overlain on a portion of CTX image P06_ 003407_1872; crater center at 8.62°N, 48.0°E [6, 7].   Experimental Setup: To examine the effects of ice cover on delta morphology, and to test the hypothesis that ice cover elongates topset deposits out to a depth below which the ice cover floats [1], we conducted two 3D flume experiments. Run 1 was performed under ice-free conditions and Run 2 with ice cover in the receiving basin. The tank used in both experiments is 90 cm long, 44 cm wide, and 36 cm deep, and was placed at ~5° slope. Sediment and water were fed from a single point source into the basin with a constant water level. Due to the basin slope, water depth linearly increased from 4.2 cm at the upstream end to 12 cm at the downstream end. Sediment and water discharges were constant throughout the experiments at 0.623 cm3/s and 15.14 cm3/s, respectively. Sediment was a mixture of brown crushed walnut shells (ρ = 1.3 g/cm3) and white quartz sand (ρ = 2.6 g/cm3) in 1:1 ratio by volume (to highlight differential deposition between coarse and fine sediments). For Run 1, we used water at room temperature and for Run 2, the water temperature was ~3°C. To simulate landfast ice (typical of sea ice cover in the Arctic and lake ice cover in Antarctica [1]), a 45 cm long, 44 cm wide, and 6 cm thick floating ice cover composed of pressed crushed ice was placed at the upstream end for Run 2. A 10 cm by 10 cm area of this ice cover was carved out at the source to guide initial flow and assist sediment deposition into openwater conditions. The ice cover was held in place with two bricks 45 cm downstream of the input source.  These bricks were also used in Run 1 as a control. The run time of each experiment was 1 hour and time-lapse photography captured delta geometry and pattern evolution during the entire duration. At the end of each experiment, the water from the basin was drained out to fully examine the morphology of the deposit. Each deposit was then radially sectioned to study the stratigraphy.   Results: Delta deposits from Run 1 and 2 exhibited distinct morphology and stratigraphy (Fig. 2, 3, and 4).  Fig. 2. Delta deposit from Run 1 under ice-free conditions showing radially symmetric surface topography. Blue line shows the approximate position of shoreline. Morphology.  Run 1, with ice-free conditions, formed a deposit with relatively uniform and radially symmetric surface topography and a linearly sloped 2443.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
delta front (foreset) surface (Fig. 2). The delta also exhibited a relatively smooth shoreline, but otherwise no distinctive features. Run 2, on the other hand, produced a more dynamic deposit with variable topography and a relatively rough/rugose shoreline. Instead of a uniform fan, the delta deposit was composed of 4 extended, subaqueous lobate features on the topset and 3 areas of topographic lows in between those lobes that extend onto the delta foreset (Fig. 3).  Stratigraphy.  Deposits from both Run 1 and 2 showed a downstream-fining trend from sand to crushed walnut shells and clear lithofacies boundary between these two grain sizes. Each radial section from Run 1 exhibited relatively uniform stratigraphy across the radial direction. Sections from Run 2, however, showed dynamic stratigraphy (Fig. 4). A succession of extended sand tongues was observed where lobes were located and was adjacent to the finest (dark brown) crushed walnut shell layers. Some hollow areas were also preserved in the stratigraphy, where ice was isolated and trapped during deposition.  Discussion: Our preliminary results indicate that the presence of ice cover alone produces a significant effect on delta morphology; it extends the subaqueous topset of the deposits [1] and creates lobate features. These lobes are most likely the result of sediment transport via channelized flow underneath the ice cover that forms after discharge restriction by the ice is no longer in effect and the water that has dammed up behind the ice cover is able to drain directly into the open-water basin, forming sub-ice channels and driving delta front progradation beneath the ice [8, 9]. Extended tongues of sand observed in stratigraphic sections are also most likely associated with the under-ice drainage through channelized flow transporting sand. After all flood water has drained, only fine grains are transported, which explains the dark brown layers of crushed walnut shell following the sand tongues. The fact that these were observed in succession strongly suggests that the cycle of flooding (damming) behind the ice cover and drainage occurred intermittently, even under constant sediment and water discharge conditions. The presence of ice caused the topographically low areas between the lobes, which correspond to the ice-bonding surface of the deposit [9].  Our results provide direct predictions for the effects of ice cover on delta morphology. In addition, exploring the effects of environment and climate changes (i.e., sediment discharge and ice thickness) would be critical to further test the hypothesis of a "cold and wet" early martian climate, and to interpret paleoclimate history.   References: [1] Are, F. and Reimnitz, E. (2000) JCR, 16(4), 1083-1093. [2] Kleinhans, M. G., et al. (2010) EPSL, 294(3-4), 378-392. [3] Kraal, E. R., et al. (2006) JGR, 111(E3), E03001. [4] Fairén, A. G. (2010) Icarus, 208, 165-175. [5] Wordsworth, R., et al. (2013) Icarus, 222, 1-19. [6] Harrison, K. P. and Grimm, R. E. (2005) JGR, 110, E12S16. [7] Hauber, E., et al. (2009) PSS, 57, 944-957. [8] Reimnitz, E. and Bruder, K. F. (1972) GSA, 83, 861-866. [9] Reimnitz, E. (2000) Polarforschung, 70, 123-134.  Fig. 3. Delta deposit from Run 2 under ice conditions. Red arrows indicate lobate features that represent elongated subaqueous topset and blue arrows show topographically low areas in between the lobes. Blue line is the approximate shoreline position and white lines indicate stratigraphic sections below.    Fig. 4. (a) Stratigraphic section from A to A'. Notice the extended sand tongue followed by dark brown crushed walnut shell layer. (b) Stratigraphic section from B to B'. (c) Stratigraphic section from C to C'.  Notice preserved hollow areas created by trapped ice.  2443.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
