2444.PDF
Large Impacts on the Moon: Rays, Halos, and Melts J.-P. Williams1, D. A. Paige1,B. T. Greenhagen2, and E. Sefton-Nash3, 1Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, University of California,Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA (jpierre@mars.ucla.edu), 2Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns HopkinsUniversity, Laurel, MD, USA, 3Earth and Planetary Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, London, UK.Introduction: The Diviner instrument aboardLRO acquires radiometric measurements of reflected and emitted radiation of the Moon in 9spectral channels. Over 5.5 years of data havebeen compiled into a 0.5◦ resolution global datasetwith a 0.25 hour local time resolution providing aglobal perspective of the surface energy balance ofthe Moon [1]. Impact craters are found to modify regolith thermophysical and radiative properties over large distances. The thermal signature ofTycho is asymmetric, consistent with an oblique impact coming from the west and rays require material with a higher thermal inertial than nominal regolith. The modification of the regolith by the formation of the Orientale basin is observable over asubstantial portion of the western hemisphere despite its age (∼ 3.8 Gyr), and may have contributedto mixing of highland and mare material on themargin of Oceanus Procellarum where the gradientin radiative properties at the mare-highland contactis broad (∼ 200 km).Tycho Crater: Tycho represents one of the mostsignificant thermal anomalies in the nighttime IRobservations with minimum temperatures, Tmin,exceeding the zonal average by> 30 K. Conversely,high reflectance material within and surroundingTycho reduces the maximum temperatures, Tmax.As a result, the relative temperature difference(Tmax/Tmin) experienced by Tycho and the adjacent terrain is reduced relative to the rest of thehighlands (Fig 1). The Tmax/Tmin values displayan east-west asymmetry resulting from higher Tminon the eastern wall and higher reflectance and thermal inertia materials distributed to a greater extentto the east. The warmer nighttime temperatureson the eastern wall cannot be entirely attributedto the western wall being in shadow in the afternoon. Nighttime brightness temperatures displayanisothermality in the Diviner IR channels that alsoshows a strong east-west asymmetry. Anisothermality, seen for example by differencing channel6 and 8 nighttime temperatures, results from mixtures of warmer and cooler temperatures within Diviner’s field-of-view and is diagnostic of the presence of rocks [2]. The greater anisothermality observed on the eastern crater wall indicates a greaterabundance of high thermal inertia materials and theelevated anisothermality is distributed to a greaterextent eastward outside of the crater (Fig 1).Figure 1: Maps of (a) Tmax/Tmin, and (b) nighttimeanisothermality (T6-T8), and E-W profiles across Tycho of (c) Tmax/Tmin, and (d) T6-T8. Shading indicates crater interior and arrow the central peak.Tycho displays some of the most extensive raysvisible in the Diviner data. Rays are observable asthermal anomalies in nighttime temperatures indicating a contrast in thermophysical properties inaddition to having a higher reflectance. Bandfieldet al. [2] modeled rock abundances from anisothermality observed in Diviner nighttime temperatures.The rock abundance estimates do not show an enhancement of rock concentration in the rays and2444.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
they are indistinct in the T6 − T8 maps. The thermal skin depth for a basaltic rock under lunar diurnal conditions is∼ 0.5 to 1 m indicating the thermalcontrast of the ray must largely result from objectsprimarily smaller than this size.Orientale Basin The thermal signature of the Orientale basin (Fig. 2) demonstrates the wide spreadinfluence the impact event has had on the regolithproperties in the western hemisphere. The basin,defined by the Cordillera ring, covers an area of∼ 700, 000 km2. The warmest nighttime temperatures are associated with a lobe of the Montes RookFormation that extends beyond the Cordillera scarpin the southwest corner. This area also correspondsto higher T6 − T8 nighttime anisothermality indicative of elevated concentrations of rocks consistentwith the presence of impact melt (arrow in Fig.2b). Deposits exterior to the basin are collectivelynamed the Hevelius Formation [3]. The inner facies are comprised of continuous deposits formingan annulus of material ∼ 300 − 600 km wide. Thedeposits of the inner facies are discernible in Diviner data as a region of relatively uniform, lowT6−T8 anisothermality from the Cordillera ring extending radially outward to a digitate outer marginthat roughly corresponds to the contact mapped byScott et al. [3]. This annulus of low anisothermality, most prominent in the south and east, is alsofound to be a region of low radar return [4] implying the unit is related to the radar-dark halos observed around other sizeable craters.The mare-highland boundary of westernOceanus Procellarum was likely modified by theimpact event. Diviner visual brightness (Fig. 2)shows a gradation in reflectance over a distanceof ∼ 200 km across the mare-highland boundary.Tmax values also mirror the gradient in radiativeproperties. In contrast, the gradient in thermophysical properties (e.g. T6 − T8 anisothermalityand Tmin) appear relatively narrow and abruptby comparison (within one or two map pixels,∼ 20 − 40 km) and occurs at the low side of thevisual brightness gradient at ∼ 0.06. The broadtransition in radiative properties is consistent withejecta from Orientale mixing with pre-existing,proto-Procellarum basalts (e.g. [5]).References[1] J.-P. Williams, et al. The global surface temperaturesof the Moon as measured by the Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment. Icarus, submitted, 2016.[2] J. L. Bandfield, et al. Lunar surface rock abundanceand regolith fines temperatures derived from LRODiviner Radiometer data. J. Geophys. Res., 116, 2011.doi:10.1029/2011JE003866.Figure 2: Diviner maps centered on Orientale:(a) visual brightness (VB) (b) nighttime T6−T8. Contoursare VB = 0.06 and 0.08. Line is location of profiles in(c) and (d) with arrows showing the location of VBcontours.[3] D. H. Scott, et al. Geologic map of the west side of theMoon. USGS Misc. Inv. Series Map, I-1034, 1977.[4] R. R. Ghent, et al. Earthbased radar data reveal extended deposits of the moons orientale basin. Geology, 36:343–346, 2008.[5] J. F. Mustard and J. W. Head. Buried stratiagraphic relationships along the southwestern shoresof Oceanus Procellarum: Implications for early lunarvolcanism. J. Geophys. Res., 101:18,913–18,925, 1996.2444.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
	Introduction:	Tycho Crater:	Orientale Basin