2465.PDF
HARTLEY 2: LANDING SITES OF PARTICLES EJECTED FROM THE NUCLEUS T. Hirabayashi1,J. Steckloff1, K. Graves1, 1Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-2051, USA. (thirabayashi@purdue.edu)Abstract: This preliminary work presents particledynamics around the Jupiter-family comet 103P/Hartley2 to explore where particles land after ejected from thenucleus. Particles initially rest on the tip of the nucleus’ssmall lobe and then are ejected with speed less than theescape velocity. Assuming the nucleus to be rotatingwith a spin period of 18 hours and its bulk density tobe 500 kg/m3, we obtain that the landing sites are notconcentrated in the waist region, but widely distributedover the nucleus surface. The equipotential plot showsthat landed particles may stay because low potential areaalso spread out on the large lobe. This result impliesthat while deposition of ejected particles would partiallycontribute to the formation of the smooth waist, anothermechanism is necessary to complete it.Introduction: On November 4, 2010, as a part ofan extended mission called EPOXI (Extrasolar PlanetObservation and Deep Impact Extended Investigation),the Deep Impact flyby spacecraft conducted the closestapproach to 103P/Hartley 2 [1].Unique features include the surface morphology, especially a smooth region at the waist of the nucleus.This smooth region is approximately equipotential (seeFigure 1) and is considered to result from either flowsor deposition [1]. It is distinguished from the knobbyterrain on the small lobe [1]. Also, while no water iceis detected, water vapor is recognized above the smoothwaist region and is possibly arising from there [1].These facts lead to a hypothesis of the formation thatthe smooth waist region has been created due to deposition of mixed particles that consists of dirty grains,fluffy, icy aggregates that have not sublimated yet [1].Here, we investigate this hypothesis.Meshod: We use a shape model for the nucleusof 103P/Hartley 2 developed based on images taken byEPOXI [3]. This shape model consists of 1031 verticesand 2058 triangular facets. The shape of the nucleus isbilobate; the volume ratio between the small and largelobes is ∼ 0.32. We fix the bulk density at 500 kg/m3,an approximately mean value of the values estimated byEPOXI, ranging between 220 kg/m3 and 880 kg/m3 [1].We conduct orbital simulations of particles with different locations and ejection velocities. Initially, a testparticle rests on an arbitrary vertex of the tip of the smalllobe, a primary source of ejected particles [7, 4], and isejected with a low ejection velocity less than its escapevelocity, which is 0.25 m/s. The simulation continuesuntil the particle either hits the surface or is no longerbound by the gravity of the nucleus. This simulationprocess repeats until the simulation cases cover possible ranges of ejection velocity and locations.We only take the effects of gravity and rotation intoaccount. Solar radiation pressure may also be an important driver that could perturb the motion of particlesbecause it is reported that the particle size is widely distributed, and the shape is heterogeneous [4]. However,since the orbital motion of particles is always near thesurface and ends shortly in our simulations, we considerthat such an effect is minor. We also ignore the effectof sublimation pressure on particle dynamics. To compute gravity forces, we use a technique by Werner andScheeres [5]. We define the minimum, intermediate andmaximum moment of inertia axes as the x, y and z axes,respectively.To simplify the rotation state of the nucleus, we assume that the nucleus is uniformly rotating with a spinperiod of 18 hours along the maximum moment of inertia axis. We note that Belton et al. [6] reported that theinstantaneous spin period at close encounter was 14.1hours, and the roll around the minimum moment of inertia axis is 26.72 hours. The averaged spin period alongthe angular moment vector is 18.40 hours and is inclinedto the minimum moment of inertia axis by 81.2◦. However, since the 18-hour rotation period is slow enough toneglect the rotational effect, we consider that the precession and the roll along the minimum moment of inertiaaxis plays a minor role in our results.Results: We first show the surface potential in therotating frame in Figure 1. High potential regions appear around the tip of the small lobe. The surface of thewaist and the larger lobe are almost equipotential, butlow potential areas spread out over these regions.The zero-velocity curve on the equatorial plane, i.e.,the x − y plane, determines allowable areas in whichparticles can enter (Figure 2). At a spin period of 18hours, since the equilibrium points do not yet touch thenucleus surface, the allowable region still opens aroundthe nucleus widely. Because of this orbital energy condition, particles ejected with low velocities less than theescape velocity can move over the surface.Figures 3 to 5 show the cases for ejection velocitiesof 0.1 m/s, 0.15 m/s and 0.2 m/s, respectively. In eachsimulation, the ejection velocities are constant, whilethe ejection direction varies. The red dots show the ejection locations while the green dots describe the landing sites. As the ejection velocity increases, the landingsites are widely distributed. It is hardly seen that thisdistribution is consistent with the surface morphology ofthe smooth waist region. The surface potential (Figure1) also suggests that particles landing on the large loberarely move to the waist as the potential there is as lowas the waist surface. This result may imply difficulty in2465.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
explaining the formation of the smooth area only by deposition of ejected particles. In the presentation, we willshow the results for various cases. Further investigationis necessary to understand the role of ejected particlesin the surface morphology of the nucleus.Figure 1: Surface potential map at a spin period of 18 hours.The potential is defined in the rotating frame.−2 −1 0 1 2−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52x [km]y [km]Figure 2: Zero velocity curve on the x− y plane at a spin period of 18 hours. Each contour curve indicates a different energy level in the rotating frame. The stars are the equilibriumpoints. The red dots indicate a schematic plot of the shape.Larger envelopes are surrounding the body, which implies thatif the initial energy level is less than one of the envelopes, atest particle stays moving inside it.References: [1] M. F. A’Hearn, et al. (2011) Science332(6036):1396. [2] P. Hartogh, et al. (2011) Nature478(7368):218. [3] T. Farnham, et al. EPOXI derived shapemodel of 103p/hartley 2 http://pdssbn.astro.umd.edu/holdings/dif-c-hriv_mri-5-hartley2-shape-v1.0/dataset.html.[4] B. Hermalyn, et al. (2013) Icarus 222(2):625. [5] R. A.Werner, et al. (1996) Celestial Mechanics and DynamicalAstronomy 65(3):313. [6] M. J. Belton, et al. (2013) Icarus222(2):595. [7] M. S. Kelley, et al. (2013) Icarus 222(2):634.Figure 3: Landing sites of the particle ejected from the tips.The red dots show the ejection points while the green dots arethe landing sides. The ejection velocity is 0.1 m/s.Figure 4: Landing sites of the particle ejected from the tips.The ejection velocity is 0.15 m/s.Figure 5: Landing sites of the particle ejected from the tips.The ejection velocity is 0.20 m/s.2465.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
	Abstract	Introduction	Meshod	Results	References