 MARS SAMPLE RETURN ANALOGUE MISSION: DAILY ACTIVITY PLANNING ENHANCED BY ENVIRONMENT SIMULATION SOFTWARE  H. M. Sapers1, E. Pilles1, R. Francis1,2, G. R. Osinski1,3, M. Cross4, P. Allard5. 1Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration/ Dept. of Earth Sciences, University of Western Ontario, 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 3Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 4Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration/ Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 5Canadian Space Agency. (hsapers2@uwo.ca)    Introduction: The 2015 CanMars MSR Analogue Mission was a Mars Sample Return Analogue Mission carried out in partnership between the Canadian Space Agency, MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd., and the Centre for Planetary Science and Exploration (CPSX) at the University of Western Ontario, as part of the NSERC CREATE project "Technologies and Techniques for Earth and Space Exploration" (create.uwo.ca) [1]. The purpose of the mission was to identify and collect scientifically-significant samples from a Mars-analogue setting (an undisclosed location in Utah) for subsequent return to Earth using a suite of instrumentation onboard the Mars Exploration Science Rover (MESR). Working from the Science Operations Centre at Western University, the science team planned the daily operations for MESR. These operations were then carried out by the rover control team at the CSA, and the field site team in Utah. The organization of mission control and operations structure is described in [2,3,4] Role Division: Personnel participating in the analogue mission were broadly divided into a field-based team located on-site, and an off-site mission control team. Mission control was separated into a planning unit responsible for daily, tactical and strategic plans and a science unit that directed the collection of data to satisfy specific scientific mission objectives and the interpretation of collected data [2].  Here we focus on the use of environmental simlulation softeware, Sympony, developed by Pierre Allard, robics engineer,  the Canadian Space Agency in the Daily Activiy Planning role. The Daily Activity Planner (DAP) was responsible for creating a daily task list based on specific scientific objectives in the context of the strategic mission goals within engineering limits and constraints. Specific limits included daily energy (400 W·h), data (64 000 kB), and time budgets (360 minutes) that constrained the number of tasks/activities and driving that could be accomplished in a single Sol (1 mission day between morning plan uplink and evening data downlink). The DAP served as a liaison between the science team and the planning team, providing the science team with activity limits to constrain science goals and providing the planning team with the science objectives to inform task prioritization. If the requests from the science team could not be fulfilled, the suggested plan would be re-evaluated and prioritized within activity limits. This iterative process was repeated until a set of specific tasks was created to address a set of specific science goals.  Symphony, an environmental simulation software package designed by the Canadian Space Agency, was used by the DAP to facilitate rover localization, Feature of Interest (FOI) definition, within Regions of Interest (ROI) and to visualize activity and planning constraints.  Symphony: The Symphony software package is a tool designed to plan, validate, execute and monitor integrated operations to support analogue mission planning. The component-based architecture allows for instrument and rover integration to model systems, telemetry, and the 3D environment. Within the Symphony workspace, a project folder was created for each Sol containing the FOIs as well as the location and orientation of MESR. This was uplinked with the daily plan for the field team. Data projects downlinked within each Sol folder contained, when applicable, 3D Lidar scans, panoramic and zoom images, TEMMI images, and up-dated Rover location. The Sol -1 a priori data included within the worksite consisted of a Digital Terrain Elevation Model (DEM) that would form the basis of the 3D environmental simulation within a worksite reference frame. Zoom images and lidar point clouds could be projected on the DEM. Line-of-sight maps, and slope maps indicating no-go areas in terms of loss of communication and traversable slopes respectively could be easily generated and draped onto the DEM.  The ruler tool provided a distance estimate between FOIs to gauge distance and rover travel time, while interactive and adjustable time sources and Earth-sky interface projects lighting conditions for any given time point, past or future, for image planning purposes. Symphony is arranged into two user interface components: a selection provider, activating a selection based on user action, and a selection listener, intercepting and reacting to a selection. The selections and actions are available based on an hierarchal topology through nested menus within an active session. Each active session contains all elements, worksite definitions, time sources, and systems. The 3D envi ronment viewer is a selection listener displaying actions or responding to selected tool inputs.  Value: The software represented by the Symphony vision has tremendous potential for integrating the science and planning mission control teams facilitating daily activity planning through localization and visualization of engineering and activity constraints. The data integrative and responsive 3D environmental simulation worksite viewer allows for instantaneous modeling of FOIs and provides immediate feedback to the science team regarding the feasibility of planned operations. This feedback limits iterative communication between the planning and science teams expediting the planning process to maximize resources towards data analysis and integration. Visualization of the Rover arm workspace volume allows for contact science sites to be down selected. Combined with the ability for high resolution images to be projected onto the DEM within the 3D environment, rover integration improves the accuracy and fidelity of FOI selection.  Challenges: The limited set of data products that could be integrated into the environmental simulation limited the utility of Symphony to localization and path planning - the ability to accurately project orbital and rover-aquired imagery on the DEM would greatly assist in this regard. The organization of selectable actions based on the system equipment (assemblies of sub-systems) mirroring the physical construction of MESR hindered accessibility to the science team.  While this logic makes the software easy to build, at the user interface level, a list of instruments and commandable subsystems, with their commandable properties, would be much easier to conceptualize and use.  The time-tagged, geo-referenced data products that conserve the operation context (command and parameters) have tremendous potential for data integration. However, the topology of the data products and lack of normalized data product naming conventions between users both within and between field and mission control teams rendered Symphony integrated data products time-intensive. Utility and usability of Symphony are dependant on computer resources. The computer dedicated to Symphony was non-optimal, hindering performance.  Recommendations: . Naming convention linked to planning operations for data products within a selectable map layer. . A 3-D environment worksite as a selection provider to enable live interaction with systems and FOIs precluding the use of the systems topology. . A path-depenent ruler tool that can be that can be path dependent to pinned to the DEM. . Ability to execute plans in silico so that anticipated image areas and sample volumes can be visualized so that activity parameters can be adjusted as required. . A distance radius projection that will indicate a boundary defined by a radius selected by the user to estimate driving distance from current rover location. . Ability to nest FOIs within ROIs. . Ability to project panorama images . Toggle order of projections, i.e. the MESR workspace projected over data products.  . Ability to set and select different worksite reference views, ie Bird's eye, north-facing up, rover-facing up.  . Function that will update the DEM based on high resolution Lidar point clouds to reduce localization error. This is especially important when using Symphony to visualize the rover workspace to plan parameters for contact science activities.  . Ability to project panoramic images  Conclusions: The Symphony software platform harnesses intersectoral synergy facilitating interdisciplinary collaboration fundamental to mission success while enabling resources to be directed towards data analysis maximizing science gain. Future iterations of Symphony geared towards the Science user will allow for better integration between the planning and science mission control teams and ultimately lead to a fully systems-data integration mission environment simulation.   Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada's CREATE program and the Canadian Space Agency. We would like to acknowledge the support and dedication of Mary Kerrigan, the Mission Operations Manager, and Alexandra Pontefract, the Science Team Lead.   References: [1] Osinski G. R. et al. (2015) LPSC XLVII. This conf. [2] Kerrigan M. C. et al (2015) LPSX XLVII This conf. [3] Moores J. E. et al. (2012) Adv. Space Rsrch 50 pp 1666-1686. [4] Francis R. et al (2012) Global Space Expl. Conf. GLEX-2012.04.1.6. 