2476.PDF
AN OUTDOOR GAMMA RAY AND NEUTRON INSTRUMENTATION TEST FACILITY AT NASA/GSFC.  A. Parsons1, J. Bodnarik2, T. McClanahan1 S. Nowicki3, J. Schweitzer4, R. Starr1,5. 1NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Code 691, Greenbelt, MD 20771 (Ann.M.Parsons@nasa.gov), 2University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ 85721, 3Los Alamos National Lab, Los Alamos, NM 87545, 4University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, 5Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064.  Introduction: It is usually very difficult to arrange the calibration and testing of neutron and gamma ray instruments that detect high energy radiation because of the health hazard imposed by the operation of intense penetrating radiation near areas where people work. Calibrating such neutron and gamma ray instruments can also be difficult indoors since both neutrons and gamma rays will interact with the walls, floor and ceiling of a room to produce secondary particles that will also be detected by the instrument.  The need to test and calibrate a pulsed neutron generator (PNG) - gamma ray spectrometer (GRS) instrument has prompted the development of an appropriate outdoor test facility at NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). This Gamma-Neutron Test (GNT) facility allows the safe operation of a 14 MeV deuteriumtritium PNG on top of large granite and basalt monuments surrounded by a 50 m safety perimeter. A GRS also placed on top of these monuments can determine their elemental composition by measuring the gamma ray emission resulting from the neutron interactions within the rock. Because they have been independently assayed, these monuments thus represent known standards and are the size scale appropriate for 14 MeV neutron transport. Additionally, our PNG can be used to create a source of 6 MeV gamma rays by exciting the oxygen in a circulating volume of water or antifreeze. Since radioactive sources can only provide gamma ray energies up to 2.6 MeV, the availability of a 6 MeV calibration point is very useful for high energy gamma ray instruments. This presentation will describe the GNT Facility and its capabilities. Facility Description and Capabilities: The Gamma-Neutron Test facility is located at Goddard's Geophysical and Astronomical Observatory (GGAO) site 3.8 miles from GSFC's main campus. This test facility consists of two large (1.8 m x 1.8 m x 0.9 m) Columbia River basalt and Concord Gray granite test monuments located in the middle of an open field surrounded by a 50-meter radius radiation safety perimeter. The complete bulk elemental composition of both the basalt and granite has been independently measured to ppm levels so that they act as measurement standards for gamma ray - neutron instrumentation. The monuments' meter-scale size was chosen to match typical neutron and gamma ray penetration distances[1,2].  Operating outdoors in a large empty field minimizes the background due to neutron and gamma ray interactions with nearby structures. The facility is equipped with an operations building so that users can operate and monitor their experiments at a safe distance from the neutron generator. During normal operations, the radiation safety perimeter is visually monitored to insure that personnel remain at least 50 m from the PNG neutron source at all times. Both 120V AC power and Ethernet network connectivity are provided via underground cables between the control building and the monuments. Figure 1 is an aerial view of the GNT facility. As shown in Figure 2, the instrumentation under test is placed on top of a monument so that it can measure the bulk elemental composition. An important feature of our test facility is the ability to perform layering studies using rock pavers and high-density polyethylene tiles to simulate layers of water ice. We Granite(Basalt( Figure 1. This aerial photograph of the outdoor Gamma-Neutron Test (GNT) facility shows the safety perimeter, the basalt and granite monuments as well as the control building toward the top of the photograph. 2476.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
have a large quantity of basalt pavers, granite pavers and polyethylene tiles sufficient to cover the entire face of either monument with multiple layers. These materials can be stacked to simulate a variety of scenarios, such as simulating the side of a crater. Additionally, we can introduce other materials into the stack to test sensitivities to various elements. Our large quantity of basalt and granite pavers and polyethylene tiles and the ability to use various other layering materials affords us great flexibility in constructing numerous configurations to simulate a wide variety of planetary surfaces, geological features and environments.  6 MeV Gamma Ray Source: The GNT facility can also provide a 6 MeV gamma ray source to allow the characterization and testing of a wide range of gamma-ray instruments. The 6 MeV gamma ray source utilizes a circulating flow of water or antifreeze irradiated by the PNG's 14 MeV neutrons to produce gamma rays via neutron capture on oxygen (16O(n,p)16N16O* - 16O + ɣ). The facility provides a low cost source of 2.742, 6.129 and 7.117 MeV gamma rays, near the lower energy range of most accelerators and well above the 2.614 MeV line available from the 228Th decay chain, the highest energy gamma ray available from a natural radionuclide. The 7.13 s half-life of the 16N decay allows the water to be irradiated on one side of a large granite block and pumped to the opposite side to decay. Separating the irradiation and decay regions allows for shielding material, the granite monument, to be placed between them, thus reducing the low-energy gamma-ray continuum[3]. Figure 3 is a schematic diagram showing how the oxygen in the fluid is irradiated by the PNG on one side of the granite and is then pumped to the other side where it fills a large reservoir.  Gamma ray instruments to be calibrated are placed near this reservoir at point D for the highest gamma ray intensity. References: [1] (Bodnarik et al.,"A Unique Outside Neutron And Gamma Ray Instrumentation Development Test Facility at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, 41st Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, (2010), vol. 2581.; [2] Parsons, et al., "Active Neutron And Gamma-Ray Instrumentation For In Situ Planetary Science Applications", NIM A, 652 (2011) 674679.; [3] Nowicki, S.F, S D Hunter, and A M Parsons. "Development of a Quasi-Monoenergetic 6 MeV Gamma Facility at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center." NIM A, 705 (2013) 111-116.   0.9$m$(3$()$ Figure 2. Test PNG and GRS instrumentation are placed on top of our well-characterized basalt monument to measure its composition.  Figure 3. Schematic, top view (a) and side view picture (b) of the 6 MeV gamma ray source at the NGT facility. The closed loop of PVC pipe is suspended from a steel frame resting on top of the granite block. The major components of the facility include the neutron activation loop and the gamma emission loop. The inlet and outlet of the activation loop are denoted by 'A' and 'B' respectively, Similarly 'C' and 'E' refer to the inlet and outlet of the decay loop, respectively. Point 'D' is the front end of the inner coaxial pipe of the decay loop.  2476.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
