2561.PDF
NEW EVALUATION OF SHARAD MARTIAN SURFACE ROUGHNESS DATA: IMPLICATIONS FOR ICE DISTRIBUTION, FUTURE LANDING SITES, AND ICY GALILEAN MOON STUDIES.   G. A. Morgan1 and B. A. Campbell1, 1Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, Smithsonian Institution, MRC 315, PO Box 37012, Washington DC 20013, morganga@si.edu.  Introduction: The SHARAD sounder on MRO has been highly successfully in delineating the internal geologic structure of the martian crust and polar deposits [1-2]. Through the detection of reflections originating from discrete contrasts in the dielectric properties of the subsurface, it has been possible to generate tomographic reconstructions and provide constraints on subsurface composition [3-4]. Although designed specifically to map the subsurface, SHARAD echoes also contain a range of additional information including the total electron content of the intervening ionosphere, Fresnel reflectivity and, like MOLA, can be used to garner important information regarding surface roughness [5].  SHARAD Surface Roughness: At SHARAD wavelengths (12 m to 20 m), the majority of radar backscatter is assumed to arise from facet-like patches (which may be effective coherent scatterers) that sum incoherently and therefore, the angular scattering behavior depends only on the Fresnel normal reflectivity ρ and a roughness parameter, often represented as the rms slope s, that captures the angular width of the tilt distribution [6]. There are numerous models for the scattering properties of a statistical surface at small incidence angles. These scattering models share two attributes that are useful in extracting actual surface properties. First, the peak power at normal incidence depends linearly on the Fresnel normal reflectivity and the inverse square of the roughness parameter s. Second, the ratio of power integrated over a range of incidence angles to the peak power is independent of ρ and thus modulated only by s. The Campbell et al., [5] roughness parameter exploits the second attribute to estimate values of surface roughness over horizontal scales that range from the SHARAD center wavelength (15 m) to those comparable to the illuminated footprint: ~10 - 100 m. This is considerably finer than the shortest baseline of MOLA derived roughness of [7], which is 600 m. [5] noted distinct differences between the two datasets corresponding to landforms with different surface properties.  Estimating Near-Surface Density: Based on the scattering models described above, the derivation of SHARAD surface roughness could be used to assess surface reflectivity and in turn constrain the near surface dielectric constant and density. This would require accurate calibration of the peak power so that the peak echo could be normalized by the roughness term. Calibrating the returned power is dependent on knowledge of (1) observational conditions, such as spacecraft altitude, position of solar arrays, ionosphereic conditions etc, and (2) surface properties such as coherent scattering from very smooth terrain and the effects of regional slopes. Fortunately for Mars, there is an abundance of additional datasets from which to tease out the influence of surface properties over a range of scales. For example, Fig. 1 displays the decay in average peak power caused by increased local slope.   Fig. 1 Plot showing the decrease in SHARAD peak power (>10 dB) over MOLA derived local slope. Note the sharp decline in power over angles between 0 - 5°.  Correcting for the effects of observational conditions on peak power may prove more difficult. Nevertheless, provided that all surface influences have been accounted for, it is possible to map variations in the surface density across the martian surface by comparing plots of surface roughness against peak power. Taking advantage in the doubling of SHARAD coverage since the initial Campbell et al. [5] roughness study, we will present the results of an analysis into the influence of multiple surface parameters on peak echo and derive relative density maps (Fig. 2).  Martian Near Surface Ice: The utility of global roughness datasets in the investigation of periglacial landforms has already been established by [7]. This study revealed distinct mid and high latitude bands corresponding to the roughness characteristics of widespread ice-rich landforms [8] and provided support for the occurrence of martian ice ages during periods of high obliquity [9]. We will present a fresh perspective 2561.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
by comparing SHARAD roughness with that of MOLA baseline [7] and pulse width [10] roughness datasets to determine the extent of any differences in latitude dependence. The occurrence of shallow ice within the martian regolith at high latitudes will decrease the bulk density of the upper few meters. We will employ the SHARAD density analysis described above to produce maps (Fig. 2) in order to search for the presence of potential near-surface ice.   Fig. 2 Predicted minus actual peak power return of SHARAD data over northern Amazonis Planitia. The band of warm colors in the lower half of the image represent lower than expected near-surface (~ 10m) densities.   Future Landing Sites: The SHARAD roughness parameter has already proven successful in the assessment of landing site safety for the InSight mission [11]. We will compare the landing site characteristics of past missions with those being considered for the upcoming Mars 2020 and ExoMars missions, such as Mawrth Valles (Fig. 3). As can be seen in Fig 3, large areas of the Mawrth Valles region exhibit high surface roughness over the 10-100 m scales, posing a safety concern for missions, especially ExoMars that has a large (104 km x 19 km) landing ellipse.    Figure 3 (a) A preliminary SHARAD roughness map (2 =  smooth terrain, 8 = very rough) of the Mawrth Vallis region, overlaid on MOLA shaded relief (Campbell et al., 2013). (b) Tightly aligned hummocks are responsible for high SHARAD roughness returns. (c) Smooth SHARAD terrain is correlated with a spatially limited plains unit. (b - c) are CTX images.  Galilean Icy Moons: Two radar sounders will be flown to the Jovian system as part of US and European missions in the 2020s [12]. In addition to investigating subsurface structures, the instruments will provide information on the composition of the upper crust by measuring surface reflectivity. As described previously, this will require an accurate characterization of the surface properties responsible for radar scattering. Characterizing the surface roughness of the Galilean satellites is compounded by the lack of high resolution surface image data. The majority of the surface coverage is limited to >400 m/pixel, and this resolution will only be improved upon by JUICE within very limited regions. Our analysis of the response of SHARAD to the range of surface properties on Mars will be directly relevant to the optimization of RIME operational parameters, and to the development of strategies for data interpretation. References: [1] Phillips, R. J., et al., 2008, Science, 320, 1182. [2] Phillips, R. J., et al., 2011, Science, 332, 838. [3] Carter, L. et al., 2009,  GRL, 36(23). [4] Morgan, G. et al., 2015, GRL, 42, 7336 [5] Campbell, B., 2013, JGR 118, 436. [6] Hagfors, T. (1964), JGR, 69, 3779. [7] Kreslavsky, M, & J, Head., 2000, JGR, 105, 695. [8] Mustard, J., et al 2001, Nature 412, 411. [9] Head, J., et al, Nature, 426, 797. [10] Neumann, G. et al., 2003, GRL, 30, 1561. [11] Putzig, T., et al., 2016, LPSC 47, #1655. [12] Plaut et al., 2014 LPSC 45 #2717. 2561.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
