2564.PDF
EXCITATION OF SELENOGENIC ION CYCLOTRON WAVES: IMPLICATIONS FROM ARTEMIS OBSERVATIONS AND DISPERSION ANALYSIS.  P. J. Chi1, H. Y. Wei1, W. M. Farrell2, J. S. Halekas3. 1UCLA, Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, Box 951567, Los Angeles, California, pchi@igpp.ucla.edu, hwei@igpp.ucla.edu 2Planetary Magnetospheres Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, William.M.Farrell@nasa.gov 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, jasper-halekas@uiowa.edu.  Introduction:  A unique type of electromagnetic waves can occur when the Moon is inside the Earth's magnetotail. First detected by the Apollo Lunar Surface Magnetometers, these waves are narrowband in nature and have frequencies close to the proton gyrofrequency (fc,p), which are on the order of 0.1 Hz at the lunar distance in the magnetotail. The waves are predominantly left-handed polarized, consistent with the properties of ion cyclotron waves (ICW's). It is considered that these narrowband ICWs occur due to the presence of the Moon [1].  The exact generation mechanism of these narrowband ICW's at the Moon is still an open question, but several ideas have been proposed: (a) At the time when the electric field is present, the ionized particles in the lunar exosphere will become pickup ions moving away from the Moon, forming a ring or a ring-beam velocity distribution that is highly unstable to the growth of ICW's. This process has been identified for the generation of ICW's at comets, Venus, Mars, or in the Io torus and the Saturn E-ring. (b) In the regions near and magnetically connected to the Moon, the majority of ions that flow into the Moon will be absorbed by the surface, resulting in an asymmetry in ion velocity distribution and hence temperature anisotropy. (c) The presence of multiple ion species and the cold phtoelectron beam can generate electromagnetic ICW's [2]. The objective of this study is to understand the excitation of ICW's at the Moon through the detailed wave and particle observations by the two ARTEMIS probes near the Moon and the wave dispersion analysis. As pickup ions are one of the major loss mechanisms of the lunar exospehre, the connection between selenogenic ICW's and pickup ions is a part of the larger problem related to the loss of volatiles from the Moon. ARTEMIS Observations: ARTEMIS consists of two identical spacecraft orbiting around the L1 and L2 Lagrangian points in the Earth-Moon system. Since mid-2011, the two probes, P1 and P2, have been in stable equatorial, high-eccentricity orbits at altitudes of ~100 km  19,000 km. Each of the two ARTEMIS spacecraft is equipped with a comprehensive set of field and particle instruments. Two types of narrowband ICW's observed by ARTEMIS are exemplified by Figure 1. The first example shows an event when ARTEMIS P1 was at an altitude of 1200 km on the sunward side and was connected to the Moon by magnetic field lines (Figure 1a). Unlike the more continuous trains of ICW's typicall found in the Apollo LSM data, this ICW event is much shorter in duration, a result likely due to the spacecraft trajectory. The wave frequency is close to fc,p, and the hodogram analysis shows clear left-handed, almost circular polarization. The ESA instrument on board ARTEMIS P1 detected keV ions that are typical of the Earth's plasma sheet. More importantly, the velocity distribution of ions shows a half-sphere geometry, except for ions with higher energies that can come over from the other side of the Moon through gyration motion (Figure 1b).   The second ICW example was also observed by ARTEMIS P1, but at a time when the spacecraft was located about 5.5 lunar radii from the Moon (in the SSE Y direction) and was not connected to the Moon by magnetic field lines. The wave frequency in this case was approximately fc,He+, the gyrofrequency of He+ (Figure 1c). The ESA instrument detected ions at energies of around 100 eV, and the ion velocity distribution was mostly symmetric, with a net flow velocity at around 150 km/s in the anti-sunward direction (Figure 1d). Wave Dispersion Analysis: To understand if the observed particle distributions are prone to ion cyclotron instability, we estimate the wave growth using the Waves in Homogeneous Anisotropic Magnetized Plasma (WHAMP) program [3]. For the first type of ICWs, we use an anisotripic distribution with a drift along the magnetic field to emulate the observed velocity distribution, and the WHAMP dispersion analysis shows the maximum wave growth below fc,p (Figure 2a). For the second type of ICWs, we prescribe a pickup ion population in the velocity distribution, and the dispersion analysis also indicates wave growth below the ion gyrofrequency (Figrue 2b). Excitation of Selenogenic ICW's and Connection to Lunar Exosphere:  The ARTEMIS observations of ICW's that we have examined suggest at least two wave excitation mechanisms at work. First, the ICW events at locations near and magnetically connected to the Moon strongly hint a wave generation through the absorption of ions by the Moon. This process is similar to the losscone-induced ion cyclotron instability in the inner magnetosphere [4], and it implies that the presence of the 2564.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Moon can modify the local plasma condition in the Earth's magnetotail. Second, the ICW's located at several lunar radii from the Moon are likely caused by pickup ions (PUI)  that originate from the lunar exosphere. The amplitude of a PUI-induced ICW in the cometary environment is known to relate to the PUI density [5], but such a relationship for the lunar exosphere may be different. Future work on modeling wave excitation by PUI from the lunar exosphere can help identify the exact relationship between the ICW amplitude and the PUI density, enabling the estimation of the amount of exospheric constituents that participate in the wave excitation process.  References: [1] Chi P. J. et al. (2013) Planet. Space Sci., 89, 21-28. [2] Poppe A. R. et al. (2012) GRL, 39, L17104. [3] Rönmark K. (1982) Tech. Rep. 179, Kiruna Geophysical Institute. [4] Denton R. E. et al. (1992) JGR, 97, 12093-12103. [5] Huddleston D. E. and Johnstone A. D. (1992) JGR, 97, 12217-12230.   (a)  (b)  Figure 2. Wave dispersion analysis for (a) the first type and (b) the second type of selenogenic ICWs. (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  Figure 1. Two examples of ion cyclotron waves near the Moon observed by ARTEMIS. (a,b) Magnetic field and ion velocity distribution for the 16 July 2011 event. (c,b) Observations by the same ARTEMIS instruments for the 10 December 2011 event. 11.85 11.9 11.95 12 12.05 12.1-2024681012UT [hours]Bx,y,z [nT]ARTEMIS TH-B 2011-7-16BXBZBY2564.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
