2576.PDF
PLANETARY LEARNING THAT ADVANCES THE NEXUS OF ENGINEERING, TECHNOLOGY, AND SCIENCE.M. P. Milazzo1,?; J. Clark2; R. Anderson1; T. Gaither1; R.G. Vaughan1. 1USGS Astrogeology Science Center;2Northern Arizona University; ?(moses@usgs.gov)Introduction: Planetary Learning that Advancesthe Nexus of Engineering, Technology, and Science(PLANETS) was selected as one of 27 projects to support the NASA Science Mission Directorate Science Education Cooperative Agreement Notice (SE-CAN) [1].Our goal is to to develop and disseminate out-of-schooltime (OST) curricular and related educator professionaldevelopment modules that integrate planetary science,technology, engineering, and mathematics. We havecreated a partnership between planetary science subjectmatter experts (SMEs), curriculum developers, scienceand engineering teacher professional development experts, and OST teacher networks. The PLANETS teamincludes the Center for Science Teaching and Learning(CSTL) at Northern Arizona University (NAU); the U.S.Geological Survey (USGS) Astrogeology Science Center (Astrogeology), and the Boston Museum of Science(MOS).PLANETS aims to increase public awareness anduse of NASA resources by creating science, technology,engineering, and mathematics (STEM) educational curricula in the context of planetary science. Although thematerials developed by PLANETS will be aimed at middle school students, all materials will be made availablefor free to the public.Alignment with National Standards: PLANETSaddresses three national goals of the 2013 FederalSTEM Education Strategic Plan (FSESP) [2]:1. Improve STEM Instruction through professionaldevelopment for OST educators.2. Increase and sustain youth and public engagementby providing engaging STEM content for OST experiences.3. Better serve historically under-represented groupsin STEM fields by focusing efforts for dissemination of materials in areas serving underrepresented students.In addition to the alignment with the Federal STEMEducation Strategic Plan, PLANETS curricula and activities are aligned with the Next Generation ScienceStandards (NGSS) [3]; the state-sponsored science andengineering equivalent to the Common Core mathematics and English language arts/literacy standards (Table 1).Teams and Relationships: PLANETS consists ofplanetary and Earth scientists, science educators, STEMeducation scientists, engineering curriculum developers, professional developers, and internal and externalproject evaluators. PLANETS is led by PI, Joe¨lle G.Clark of CSTL at NAU. The Boston MOS partner is ledby Christine Cunningham; USGS Astrogeology ScienceCenter is led by Moses P. Milazzo. This collaborationbetween teams with experts in all relevant aspects ofSTEM, STEM education, and STEM educator development will be especially effective.PLANETS leverages existing NASA-supported curriculum development efforts at the MOS by expandingthe partnership to strengthen the emphasis on planetaryscience in their high quality Engineering Adventures(EA) and Engineering Everywhere (EE) curricula andto create additional modules. PLANETS also incorporates experience and data from past, current, and futureNASA missions through inclusion of SMEs at Astrogeology who participate in planetary missions. Astrogeology houses one of NASA's Regional Planetary ImageFacility (RPIF) nodes, and Collaborator Hagerty at Astrogeology is NASA's RPIF Network director. The RPIFnetwork provides a vast store of historical documentsand data sets that may be utilized in the developmentof PLANETS curricula, and serves as an internationalavenue for dissemination of PLANETS OST materials.Science Questions: NASA's Planetary Science Division (PSD) asks five fundamental questions [4]:1. How did the Sun's family of planets and minorbodies originate?2. How did the solar system evolve to its current diverse state?3. What are the characteristics of the solar systemthat led to the origin of life?4. How did life begin and evolve on Earth and has itevolved elsewhere in the solar system?5. What are the hazards and resources in the solarsystem environment that will affect the extensionof human presence in space?Each of the OST activities developed will be drivenby a realistic motivating question intended to engagestudents and encourage them to want to learn. For example, NASA/JPL's developing Europa Mission will provide motivating science questions that are timely, relevant, and exciting to learners of all ages. In particularfor middle school students, their activities will track engineering and science activities during development ofthe mission. In this way, middle school students who2576.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Table 1:participate in the PLANETS curriculum based on theEuropa Mission will be well aware of the mission andits development throughout their secondary education.These fundamental questions occur at the intersection of many sciences (e.g. astronomy, physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and geophysics) and are addressed primarily through spacecraft missions that involve all engineering disciplines (e.g., aerospace, biological, chemical, electrical, mechanical, software,and systems engineering). Understanding of these disciplines requires a strong mathematical background.Thus, the PSD questions logically feed into STEM education. We will develop curricula based on some ofthese questions. Table 1 provides an example of howthese curricula will be developed, the specific curriculato be developed will be presented at the meeting.Evaluations: The proposed work includes pilotstudies of the OST curricula, which will solicit feedbackfrom active educators. SMEs on the PLANETS teamwill also observe OST units in action during evaluation,and will make appropriate revisions to the science andengineering content. Summative evaluation by our partner institution, Magnolia Consulting, will focus on howfinal curricular and professional development productsare being implemented.Open Data: A primary goal of this project is toserve as many children and educators as possible — particularly those from groups under-represented in STEMfields. To do this, ensuring easy, widespread access tothe curricula is critical. All units, curricula, and supplemental materials will be made available for free download via the MOS and Astrogeology websites.References: [1] NASA Science MissionDirectorate. Nasa science mission directorate scienceeducation cooperative agreement notice (can).[2] White House Office of Education. Federal science,technology, engineering, and mathematics (stem)education: 5-year strategic plan. [3] National ResearchCouncil. Next generation science standards. [4] NASAPlanetary Science Division. Nasa planetary sciencedivision's five fundamental science questions inplanetary science.2576.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
