2586.PDF
THERMAL FATIGUE: LENGTHSCALES, TIMESCALES AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS ON REGOLITH SIZE-FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION.  C. El Mir1, K. Hazeli1, K. T. Ramesh1, M. Delbo2, and J. Wilkerson3. 1Johns Hopkins University, Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute, 3400N Charles Street, Malone Hall Suite 140, Baltimore, MD 21218 (celmir1@jhu.edu), 2CNRS-Observatoire de la Cote d’Azur, Boulevard de l’Observatoire, France. 3Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, USA   Introduction:  Regolith is perhaps the most widespread surface feature on rocky planetary bodies [1], meriting a thorough investigation of its origin and evolution. The presence of regolith on airless bodies has been attributed to the accumulation of impact ejecta and to the gradual breakdown of boulders by micrometeoritic impacts. However, ejecta velocities for small kilometer-sized asteroids typically exceed the gravitational escape velocity [1,2], which greatly limits the amount of retained debris following a high-velocity impact event. Detailed surface observation of NearEarth Asteroids showed an unexpected fine and coarsegrained regolith layer on even the smallest asteroids [3], suggesting that a different mechanism could be involved in the regolith generation process.  Motivation: A recent study [4] attributed the existence of regolith on sufficiently small planetary  bodies to cyclic stresses that develop within boulders due to the large diurnal temperature variation related to the day/night cycles, which eventually lead to fracture by a thermal fatigue crack growth. Using a simple thermomechanical model, it was demonstrated that thermal fatigue can be several orders of magnitude faster in breaking down cm-sized rocks on Near-Earth Asteroids (NEA) and Main Belt Asteroids (MBA) than fragmentation by some classical impact mechanisms. It also appeared that the thermal breakdown of larger cmsized boulders occurs faster than for smaller rocks [4], an observation that is in contrast to predictions from mechanical disruption models. This observation is justified by the existence of higher internal thermal stresses in bigger rocks resulting from the larger temperature gradient between the exposed and buried surfaces, but calls into question the degree to which this conclusion can be extrapolated or scaled for larger meter-sized rocks. In the current study, we present a numerical model that carefully solves for the thermal stresses within a meteoritic rock and captures experimentally-verified crack evolution based on well-established crack growth mechanics. We identify the main length and time-scales involved in the thermally-driven fatigue crack growth. We then utilize the new model to examine the effectiveness of thermal fatigue on larger rocks and boulders.  Modeling approach: The physical modeling of thermal fatigue requires a coupling of a thermal diffusion, thermomechanical, and fracture mechanics models in order to analyze the progressive crack growth over the entire life-cycle of a given rock. These models involve some intrinsic lengthscales and timescales that must be considered. Lengthscales: The driving force on the crack relates to thermal stresses coming from a) temperature gradient developed due to the nonhomogeneous heat distribution, and b) heterogeneity spacing, providing stress concentrations at the interfaces that promote crack growth. Furthermore, the asteroid's heliocentric distance (NEA vs MBA,     for example) affects the temperature ranges that the asteroid experiences. The rock’s conductive properties dictate the temperature penetration depth (Fig.1) after which the temperature changes occurring in one cycle drop significantly, which translate to a drop in the thermal stresses, thus reducing the effectiveness of a thermally-driven fatigue crack.  Fig. 1: Temperature as a function of rock depth at different times for a carbonaceous chondrite like main belt asteroid with rotational period of 6 hours. The temperature changes near the rock’s surface are substantial over the span of a few minutes but become significantly smaller after a characteristic depth, leading to reduced thermal stresses.  Timescales: Thermal fatigue crack growth occurs due to the cyclic nature of thermal heating related to the day/night cycle. Therefore, the asteroid's rotational period, typically in the order of several hours, is one of the key timescales. In addition, the temperatures reached within a rock during a single cycle are dictated by the heat transfer rate linked to the material's conduc2586.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tive properties (Fig.1). Therefore, a progressive thermal fatigue model needs to a have a timestep small enough to resolve the heat transfer changes (on the order of several minutes), and still be able to bridge between the fast rotational periods (hours) and the final time-to-fracture (on the order of millions of years). Thermal stresses can be relaxed by certain mechanisms [6] that are not included in this model. Numerical Implementation: A numerical model is implemented using the extended finite element method (XFEM) [5]. The scheme provides a means for treating cracks as discontinuities in the displacement field that lead to stress concentrations around the crack tips. The model is optimized to run on parallel processors to provide the ability to resolve the required temporal resolutions, allowing for fast simulation of some thousands of years while still using timestep increments of as low as 30 minutes. The effects of the microstructure on the global stress field are captured using a two-scale model based on the representative-volume-element within the mesh. Model Predictions: We set up the initial runs using boundary conditions similar to those in [4], which are appropriate for rocks smaller than 10 cm on the surface of a MBA. Further calculations are made for larger rocks subjected to the same thermal cycling and boundary conditions. A 30-micron crack is inserted at the surface of all rocks, and a Paris growth law is adopted [4]. The crack evolution is then monitored until its length becomes comparable with the rock diameter, indicating complete fracture.  Fig. 2: Time required to break rocks on the surface of a carbonaceous chondrite like asteroid at 2.5 AU. Symbols show the time required to thermally fragment the rocks using the model from [3] (red), and the newly developed model (blue). The dashed line indicates the time required to fragment the same set of rocks by micrometeoroid impacts. Error bars capture uncertainties in model parameters. The computed time to fracture of small rocks (10cm and less) is consistent with the coarse theoretical model and follow the same inverse trend between rock size and fracture time. However, it is observed that at the larger scales, the time to fracture by thermal fatigue becomes slower.  Summary: The current study highlights the complexity associated with thermal fatigue modeling for asteroidal rock breakdown. The nature of the problem inherently gives rise to several important lengthscales, namely the heterogeneity spacing within the rock, the heat penetration depth, and the asteroid's heliocentric distance, as well as timescales such as the rotational period and the heat transfer rate within the material. These scales need to be accounted for in any thermal fragmentation model or scaling law, making the extrapolation of results to a different size of rocks, heliocentric distance, or number of periods a more complicated process than a simple linear scaling. The results also show that the time for complete rock breakdown due to thermal fatigue increases for large rocks and boulders, an observation that is in-line with several boulder and rock aging calculations [7]. For sufficiently large rocks, mechanical disruption by impact becomes more dominant than thermal fatigue. At those sizes, thermal fatigue would be more efficient in flaking off smaller material from the surfaces, as observed in [8]. Such study requires allowing the surface cracks to grow freely and carefully tracking the path of a surface crack and its coalescence with other cracks. The development of physical models for regolith evolution due to thermal fatigue that capture the different mechanisms involved (fracture by a single large crack, or flaking of material due to a network of interacting cracks) is an essential step to obtain insight into the   processes that drive the    origin  and  evolution of regolith on airless bodies. References: [1] Housen K. R. et al. (1982), Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci., 5056-5070. [2] Housen  K. R & Holsapple K. A. (2011) Icarus, 211,856-875. [3] Miyamoto H. et al. (2008) SPIE, 6960. [4] Delbo  M. et al. (2014) Nature, 508, 233-236. [5] Dolbow J. et al. (1999) Int. J. Numer. Meth. Eng 46(1), 131-150. [6] Johnson T.V. et al, Icarus 18.4 (1973): 612-620. [7] Basilevsky A. T. et al, LPS XLVI, Abstract #1440. [8] Dombard A. et al (2010), Icarus, 713-721 Acknowledgements:  This work was supported by the Solar System Exploration Research Virtual Institute (SSERVI) NASA Cooperative Agreement NNA14AB02A and by the Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute (HEMI). MD thanks support from the ANR SHOCKS. 2586.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
