2591.PDF
Erosion of Titan's Craters from Cassini RADAR and VIMS Imagery.  J. D. Hofgartner*1, B. J. Buratti1, R. H. Brown2, J. W. Barnes3, C. Sotin1, K. Lawrence1, 1Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena CA 2University of Arizona, Tucson AZ, 3Univeristy of Idaho, Moscow ID (jhofgartner@astro.cornell.edu)   Introduction:  Titan is unique in the solar system as the only extraterrestrial world known to host a presently active hydrologic cycle [1].  Titan therefore is a natural laboratory for the study of hydrologic processes.  The degradation state of Titan craters can provide significant insight into erosional processes since the initial state of the crater can be reasonably assumed.  Crater degradation on Titan is expected to be dominated by aoelian and fluvial erosion. Thus Titan's craters provide a ground truth for aeolian and fluvial erosion in environmental conditions different than those on Earth.  The extent of aeolian and fluvial erosion of Titan's craters provides insights into hydrologic cycling throughout Titan's past. Method:  The Cassini Saturn orbitter takes advantage of windows in Titan's atmosphere to image the surface at infrared and microwave wavelengths.  The degradation state of Titan's craters is analyzed using both Cassini VIMS and RADAR imagery. This combined approach utilizes the spectral information in VIMS imagery and higher spatial resolution in RADAR imagery [2]. Figure 1 shows three Titan craters, Selk, Sinlap, and Paxsi that are in different states of degradation.  Figure 2 shows a side by side comparision of VIMS and RADAR imagery of Paxsi crater.    Figure 1: Cassini VIMS observations of three of Titan's craters.  The left most panel is of Selk from Soderblom et al., 2010 [3], the middle panel is of Sinlap from Le Mouelic et al., 2008 [2] and the right panel is of Paxsi from Buratti et al., 2012 [4]. These three craters are in different states of degradation.  Paxsi has a breach in its rim and dune material intruding onto the crater floor.  The other two craters do not appear to be breached.  The rim of Selk appears to be more degraed than either Sinlap or Paxsi but this may be because of the higher resolution of the image.  However,(  Figure 2: Cassini VIMS and RADAR HiSAR images of Paxsi crater on Titan.  The VIMS images shows a breach at the lower right with dune material protruding into the crater floor [4].  The RADAR image confirms the existence of the breach and suggests other smaller breaches may exist around the rim.  Menrva, Titan's largest and first identified impact crater, is an especially good candidate for this analysis.  It has the diamter and a central ring and thus the most real estate exposed to Titan's erosional processes.  Evidence of aeolian and fluvial erosion at Menrva has been reported [5]. Implications:  The results from this study can be used to understand the evolution of a wide range of types and ages of craters on Titan [5]. By extension, the importance of fluvial and aeolian processes on Titan's surface in general can be understood, as crater morphology is far better established than most other landforms on Titan.   References: [1] Lunine J. I. and Atreya S. K. (2008) Nature Geo. Sci., 1, 159-164.  [2] Le Mouelic S. et al. (2008) JGR 113, E04003.  [3] Soderblom J. M. et al. (2010) Icarus 208, 905-912.  [4] Buratti B. J. et al. (2012) Planetary & Space Sci., 60, 1, 18-25.  [5] Wood C. A. et al. (2010), Icarus, 205, 334-344. 2591.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
