2600.PDF
MODELING OF THE ENCELADUS WATER VAPOR JETS FOR INTERPRETING UVIS STAR AND SOLAR OCCULTATION OBSERVATIONS.  G. Portyankina1 , L. W. Esposito1, A. Ali1, and C. J. Hansen2, 1LASP, 3665 Discovery Dr., Boulder, CO 80303, USA (Ganna.Portyankina@lasp.colorado.edu), 2Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ, USA.   Introduction: One of the most spectacular discoveries of the Cassini mission is jets emitting from the southern pole of Saturn’s moon Enceladus. The composition of the jets is water vapor and salty ice grains with traces of organic compounds. Jets are observed by multiple instruments on Cassini. Recent observations of the visible dust plume by the Cassini Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS) identified as many as 100 jet sources located along fissures across Enceladus’ south pole called “Tiger stripes” [1]. There is a recent hypothesis that some of these jets are an “optical illusion” caused by geometrical overlap of continuous source eruption along the tiger stripes in the field of view of ISS [2]. UVIS observations: The Cassini Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph (UVIS) has observed occultations of several stars and the Sun by the water vapor plume of Enceladus. During the solar occultation separate collimated gas jets were detected inside the background plume [3,4]. These observations directly provide data about water vapor column densities along the line of sight (LoS) of the UVIS instrument.  While Enceladus and its plume occult a star or the sun, UVIS takes spectroscopic measurements in its Far UltraViolet (FUV) and High Speed Photometer (HSP) channels. In the UVIS occultation mode the spatial dimension of the solar/stellar image is projected onto two windows on the detector, and focused onto 1024 pixels in the spectral dimension, each having a width of 0.606 Å [5]. During a solar occultation in 2010 95 successive spectra have detected attenuation of the solar light by the vapor, each integrated over intervals of 1 sec. We can calculate the optical depth of water vapor from the UVIS spectrum by summing over the wavelength range 850–1000 Å and normalizing the occulted signal by the non-occulted signal. Doing so for every spectra successively acquired during the occultation we can plot water vapor optical depth as a function of time during the observation. The optical depth can then be converted to the column density along the line of sight of UVIS. The result of this multi-step calculation for the 2010 solar occultation is shown in the top panel of Figure 1 (blue curve). Model:  We have constructed a 3D direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) model for Enceladus jets and currently apply it to the analysis of UVIS jet observations. The Monte Carlo model tracks test particles from their source at the surface into space. The initial three-dimensional velocity of each particle contains two components: a velocity Vz which is perpendicular to the surface, and a thermal velocity Vth which is isotropic in the upward hemisphere. The direction and speed of the thermal velocity of each particle is chosen randomly but the ensemble moves isotropically at a speed which satisfies a Boltzmann distribution for a temperature Tth. Vth is the parameter determining the jet widening rate per altitude and as    Figure 1: Top panel shows comparison of water vapor column density derived from the UVIS solar occultation observation from 18 May 2010 (blue curve) and best fit of 43 modelled jets (red curve). Bottom panel shows locations of these 43 jets on the surface of Enceladus. 2600.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
such is directly determined by the gas temperature. A range for reasonable Vz is then determined by requiring that modeled jet widths match the observed ones. The initial position of each particle is chosen depending on the source type: it might be either 1) a localized source resembling an isolated jet; 2) an extended source resembling a broad plume; or 3) an elongated source spreading along a tiger stripe. In the first case the initial positions of all test particles for a single jet are fixed to one of 100 jets sources identified in [1]. For an extended plume all locations within the circumpolar area confined by latitude 70°S are allowed. For a curtain source the coordinates are selected along the tiger stripes.  During each simulation run, the model is first required to reach steady-state, as defined by minimal variations of the 3-dimensional number density of test particles in the whole model domain. A precise criterion for the steady-state depends on number of test particles in the particular run and resolution requirements.  Each model run results in a set of coordinates and velocities of a given set of test particles. These are converted to the test particle number densities and then integrated along UVIS LoS for each time step of the UVIS occultation observation. The geometry of the observation is calculated using SPICE [6]. Below we discuss the next step of our data analysis – the fitting procedure – on one example of the model run. This run was performed for 100 isolated sources each with 15 thousand test particles and assuming Vz = 1.8 km/s. The number of test particles is chosen to satisfy the spatial resolution requirement of 1 km. While Vz is a free parameter of the model, it was determined that lower velocities can not reproduce the narrow features detected in observational data. Fitting procedure: In the case of the isolated point sources, the overarching result of the simulation run is a test particle number density along UVIS LoS for each time point during the occultation observation for each of the jets separately.  Each jet results in a curve with time on the x-axis and test particle number density on the y-axis. To fit the model to UVIS data we should integrate all jets that are crossed by the LoS at each point of time during the observation. The relative strength of the jets can be modified by multiplying each of them by a coefficient ki. This relative strength must be modified to fit the observed UVIS curve. We took the one hundred model jets and formed a matrix J with each model jet as a column. To fit it to observed UVIS number densities Qt we have to solve an equation that in matrix form can be written as   First we performed Gaussian elimination on J using the three elementary row operations resulting in the reduced row echelon form (RREF) of J. The RREF of a matrix is always unique and among other properties, it can tell us immediately if the columns of J are linearly independent or not. If not, then the RREF can label which columns are linearly independent as well as how the rest can be written as a linear combination of the linearly independent set [7]. 66 of the jets were linearly independent and the rest of the 34 could be written as a linear combination of the 66 jets. This means that 34 of the jets contain no new information and can be discarded without loss of information. Results: Considering the 66 jets, we performed constrained linear least squares to write the UVIS measurements as a linear combination of the 66 jets. The constraints were that all 66 of the coefficients must be non-negative. Since the objective function being minimized is quadratic, there is guaranteed to be a global minimum (which may not be unique because of the constraints). The algorithm we used for our current problem was a "trust-region-reflective" algorithm described in [8]. Some of the obtained coefficients were extremely small (between 1e-7 and 1e-12). Coefficients less than 1e-7 were set to zero resulting in additional 23 of the coefficients being zero. In the end, the UVIS vector can be written as a linear combination of only 43 model jets. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the resulting fit of the 43 model jets (red curve) to the observed UVIS occultation data (blue curve). The bottom panel shows the locations of these 43 jets. Conclusions: Peaks in column density along UVIS line of sight can be explained with isolated highly collimated jets that have different production rates and vertical molecule velocities of at least 1.8 km/s. At least 43 individual jets are required to fit the observed UVIS data, while a combination of a larger set of linearly-dependent jets can not be excluded. References: [1] Porco et al. 2014 The Astronomical Journal 148, 45 [2] Spitale et al. 2015 Nature 521, 57–60. [3] Hansen et al., 2006 Science, 311, 1422–1425. [4] Hansen et al., 2011 JGR 38. [5] Esposito et al., 2004. Space Sci. Rev., 115, 299–361. [6] Acton, C.H., 1996 PSS 44, 65-70. [7] Kreyszig, E. 2006 John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ. [8] Coleman and Li, 1996. SIAM Journal on Optimization, Vol. 6, Number 4, pp. 1040–1058. 2600.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
