2606.PDF
 OASIS: A LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPH-MASS SPECTROMETER FOR DETECTION OF ORGANICS ON ICY SURFACES A. E. Southard1, S. A. Getty3, J.P. Ferrance2,  M. A. Balvin3, J. E. Elsila3, D. Stewart3, B. J.          Cόlon-Curiel4, 1University Space Research Association (Adrian.e.southard@nasa.gov), 2J2F Engineering, 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 4University of Puerto Rico  Introduction:  Life, as we know it, requires water, energy, salts, and organic compounds to exist. We report here advancements in instrumentation that are motivated by the in situ search for biologically relevant organic compounds such as amino acids, which have been detected in carbonaceous meteorites (e.g. [1]) and cometary dust [2]. Even lunar samples from the Apollo missions may have non-terrestrial contributions [3] and can inform our understanding of the availability of biologically relevant organic material to early Earth and planetary bodies beyond Earth, such as icy worlds in the outer solar system.   Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) offers a very sensitive technique that could be used to inventory the organic molecules on airless, icy bodies in the solar system including Europa and Enceladus, the Moon’s South Pole-Aitken basin, and comets. Liquid chromatography provides separation of the different organic or ionic molecules based on the particular colum used. The mass spectrometer allows for identification of the individual analytes as they elute from  the chromatography column. LCMS typically takes advantage of a soft ionization technique, electrospray, that transfers the analyte molecule from the liquid to the gas phase with little to no fragmentation and without the need for derivatization to enhance volatility.  OASIS instrument:  The OASIS (Organics Analyzer for Sampling Icy Surfaces) instrument [4] will use LCMS to determine the organics present in a planetary environment. Chromatography has been demonstrated  on a microchip, and recent efforts have shown successfully electrospray from a chemically etched onchip spray nozzle. OASIS uses a heated, differentially pumped interface to direct ions from the electrospray tip into a time-of-flight mass spectrometer operating under high vacuum.  The differential pumping design is shown schematically in Figure 1.  While a series of vacuum pumps is used in laboratory breadboard testing, we intend to exploit the vacuum of an airless body, balanced with a high purity gas supply and carefully designed pumping orifices, to achieve the desired pressure in each OASIS ion transfer stage. The OASIS LC-ESI microchip has been described previously [5] and features fluidic channels, two-zone temperature control, and electrical connections to enable heater control and electrospray. . The OASIS chip design is compatible with multiplexing of a range of column chemistries for broad analytical capability, but the focus of our testing to-date has been on the high priority compound class of amino acids.    Figure 1 Schematic illustrating the 4 stages of the LC microchip-TOFMS interface of OASIS   The interface between the OASIS microchip and time-of flight mass spectrometer includes four stages (Figure 1): (1) an electrospray stage where sub-ambient electrospray generates charged droplets that are transmitted into a heated capillary; (2) a molecular beam stage for directing the ions that is based on designs used in earlier models of quadrupole ion traps (Finnigan LCQ) and has been extensively modeled [6]; (3) an ion optics stage for collimating the ion beam, composed of a 5 element electrostatic lens (Kimball Physics); and (4) a time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TOFMS) prototype [7] which houses a multistage-reflectron and microchannel plate detector.  0 20 40 60 80050001000015N15N+14N15N+H2O+OH+14N+CountsMass (Daltons)H2+Ar+CO2+O2+N2+CO+H+O+14N2+27 28 29 30 31050100150200CountsMass (Daltons)17 18 19 20 210200400600H218O+18OH+H2O+CountsMass (Daltons)OH+ Figure 2 A mass spectrum of Earth’s atmosphere using a the OASIS TOF-MS prototype with electron ionization.  The performance of the TOF-MS [7] has been demonstrated using a electron ionization source.  A typical mass spectrum is shown in Figure 2.  Mass res2606.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
olution of m/Δm of 250 was achieved.  These baseline data provide confidence that the mass range and resolution of the TOF-MS will be sufficient for detection of amino acids and other small soluble organics via the ESI interface. Results: The microfluidic spray tip has been coupled to a commercial mass spectrometer and compares favorably to a commercial electrospray tip (Figure 3). Electrospray testing of the microchip was performed using a 90/10 methanol:water solution with 5 mM sodium formate and 0.1 mM each of adenine and phenolphthalein on a commercial TOF-MS (Waters nanoAcquity coupled to Waters LCT Premier). Electrospray was achieved from the OASIS chip, with signal intensities an order of magnitude lower than electrospray from a commercial electrospray tip(Waters, 20 micron ID polyimide coated silica).   Figure 3 A mass spectrum of electrosprayed ionized buffer solution (5 mM sodium formate with 0.1 mM each of adenine and phenolphthalein) produced by the OASIS ESI tip (top) compares favorably to that obtained using a commerical electrospray ionization tip (bottom).   The design and testing of the electrospray interface into the miniature custom TOF mass spectrometer has been the focus of recent efforts and has used the commercial spray tip for higher sensitivity. Current testing efforts have focused on the first three stages of the interface. To date, stable electrospray has been performed under helium, air, and carbon dioxide down to 250 torr. Achieving electrospray under subambient conditions is important for reaching the low pressures (less than 1E-5 torr) required for TOF-MS operation.  Electrical current indicating successful electrospray and ion transmission has been detected at the output of all three stages, and efforts are underway to optimize the current transmission efficiency. Optimization is done by tuning experimental parameters, such as voltages on electrodes in the molecular beam and ion optics stages, temperature of the transfer capillary, and adjustment of the flow rate within a range compatible with chromatography.  Recent design efforts have been pursued to optimize transmission of ions from the ESI spray tip to the ion source of the TOF-MS through the differentially pumped stages.  SIMION modeling of the ion optics stage and TOF-MS stage has been used to determine the optimal voltage for limiting beam spread so that ions may exit an aperture at the end of the third stage and be focused within the extraction stage of the TOFMS.  Results of the modeling are shown in Figure 4, where the red features represent ion trajectories originating from the second stage of the interface assembly (left) and focusing to a pencil beam at the extraction optics of the TOF-MS (right).  In this view, the ions would be ejected vertically into the reflectron of the time-of-flight mass analyzer.    Figure 4 SIMION model of ion trajectories from stage 3 into the TOFMS   Conclusions:  Recent demonstration of key OASIS components has been achieved, including the ESI spray tip under sub-ambient vacuum conditions and the differential pumping interface to the TOF-MS,  that will lead to characterization of the integrated instrument in future work.    [1] D. P. Glavin et al., Meteorit. Planet. Sci., vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 889–902, 2006. [2] J. E. Elsila, D. P. Glavin, and J. P. Dworkin, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1323–1330, 2009. [3] J. E. Elsila, et al., Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, vol. 172, pp. 357–369, 2016. [4] S. A. Getty et al., 2013 IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings,  pp. 1–8, 2013, [5] A. E. Southard, et al., 2014 IEEE Aerospace Conference, pp. 1–7, 2014. [6] N. Gimelshein, et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 820–831, 2014. [7] D. P. Glavin,. et al., 2014 IEEE Aerospace Conference pp. 111, 2012.  2606.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
