2612.PDF
CHIRAL ANALYSIS OF RARE AND COMMON SUGAR DERIVATIVES IN CARBONACEOUS CHONDRITES.  G. Cooper1 and A. C. Rios1, 2 , 1Exobiology Branch, NASA-Ames Research Center, MS 239-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035, george.cooper@nasa.gov, 2NASA Postdoctoral Program, Exobiology Branch, NASA Ames Research Center, MS 239-4, Moffett Field, CA 94035, andro.c.rios@nasa.gov.   Introduction:  Several identified meteoritic organic compounds are chiral, i.e., they exist as two nonsuperimposable mirror images (enantiomers) usually denoted "D" or "L". Most are racemic, their two enantiomers are of equal abundance [1, 2]. Racemic compounds are expected in nature since typical abiotic synthetic processes are (historically) thought to occur in the absence of asymmetric influences or starting material. Sugars, defined as carbonyl compounds (aldehydes or ketones) that contain multiple carbonhydroxyl (C-OH) bonds (or "alcohol" groups) are critical to biological processes and were likely necessary for the origin of life. Sugars derivatives, the subject of this work, include sugar acids and sugar alcohols. Collectively, these compounds are referred to simply  as"polyols": previously, we identified several polyols in the Murchison and Murray meteorites by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) [3]. The origins of the compounds were ascribed to the formose reaction [4] and/or photolysis of precursor compounds  on interstellar grains [3].  In extant biological polyols, the D enantiomers are significantly more abundant than the L enantiomers. For example, only D -ribose, D -2ˈdeoxyribose, and D -glucose are found in polymers such as nucleic acids and polysaccharides. The exclusive use of only one enantiomer is referred to as homochirality and its biological origin is unknown. Here we describe the results of GC-MS enantiomer analysis of several meteoritic polyols This includes all straightchained mono sugar acids (aldonic acids) of threecarbon (3C) to six-carbon (6C); 4C deoxy sugar acids; and chiral (and non-chiral) analyses of the majority of 2C-5C sugar alcohols. We found that aldonic acids, both rare and common, contain significant Denantiomer excesses that increase with increasing carbon number.  Methods: Meteorite samples analyzed (classification). Murchison (CM2), Murray (CM2), GRA 95229 (CR2), Alan Hills (ALH) 83102 (CM2), ALH 85013 (CM2). LaPaz Icefield (LAP) 02333 (CM2). All meteorites except Murchison and Murray were obtained from the Antarctic collection at NASA's Johnson space center. Extraction and preparation of meteorite samples. Procedures for the extraction and isolation of bulk fractions of compounds (including ion exchange chromatography) and purification of individual compounds are similar to those of previous analyses [3, 5]. Interior portions of each meteorite were taken and the water extraction of all listed meteorite samples were done under very mild extraction conditions - none were heated above room temperature in order to avoid decomposition, racemization or epimerization of any possible susceptible compounds. Derivatization of compounds for GC-MS: The most common derivatives were isopropyl esters/trifluoroacetyl esters  (ISP/TFA) and ethyl esters (Et)/TFA. Such derivatizations and analyses  by GC-MS were very similar to previous work [6] .   For isotope analyses - by gas chromatography-isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC-IRMS) some compounds were analyzed as their trimethylsilyl (TMS) derivatives with methods (including compound purification) nearly identical to those in previous work [7].  GC-MS. Two GC-MS units in EI mode were used for analyses:  a Finnigan GCQ GC interfaced to a Finnigan GCQ ion trap mass spectrometer and an Agilent 6890N GC interfaced to an Agilent 5973 or 5975 Mass Selective Detector (quadrupole mass spectrometer).  Results: In previouspreliminary, results we observed D-enantiomer excesses in 4C and 5C aldonic acids from the Murchison meteorite [8]. Figure 1 shows updated enantiomer analyses of multiple carbonaceous chondrites. As with the preliminary Murchison data, it is seen that the smallest (3C) sugar acid, glyceric acid, has an approximately 50:50 ratio of D to L enantiomers in more than one sample and meteorite (other samples are not shown). This is the case for all interior meteorite samples and indicates abiotic origins. In contrast, biological glyceric acid (a potential contaminant) is overwhelmingly the D enantiomer. As consistently as meteoritic glyceric acid is racemic, the 4C threonic acid is only observed to possess large EE (also across multiple meteorites), its D enantiomer excesses are constantly 33-55% while it is significantly less abundant in biology than glyceric acid. Methods for the reliable GC separation of erythronic acid enantiomers have only recently been developed therefore the present results contain considerably fewer analyses of this acid. However a recent measurement of Murchison erythronic acid also demonstrated a substantial excess (~ 54%) of the D enantiomer. As a marker of indigenous abiotic (extraterrestrial) synthesis, it is significant that the non-biological branched 4C acid, 2hydroxymethyl glyceric acid (HMG) (Fig. 1) is observed in all meteorite extracts containing threonic acid 2612.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
and erythronic acid, with the possible exception of the Murray meteorite. Not analyzed previously were comparably sized sugar alcohols. Of the 4C sugar alcohols, only threitol is chiral: erythritol possesses a plane of symmetry and therefore does not exhibit enantiomerism.  Figure 2a, c-e, shows that, in contrast to the 4C sugar acids, threitol is apparently racemic in multiple meteorites. In addition, the analog of HMG, the (rare) branched 4C alcohol hydroxymethyl glycerol (HMGly), is commonly present. The 5C sugar alcohols (Fig. 2e), as with 5C sugar acids, shows a large decrease in abundance relative to the 4C alcohols. Therefore the D / L ratio of arabinitol (the only chiral 5C sugar alcohol) cannot yet be determined with confidence. However, although of low abundance in GRA 92229, arabinitol appears to be both nearly racemic and its abundance is roughly in proportion to the other 5C sugar alcohols in contrast to microbial profiles, e.g., Figure 2f. More details on these results, enantiomer analyses of 6C polyols and isotope ratios will be presented.  References: [1] Pizzarello S., Cooper G. W. and Flynn G. J. in Meteorites and the Early Solar System II   (eds D.  Lauretta, L.A. Leshin, & H.Y. McSween Jr.)  625-651 (University of Arizona Press, 2006). [2] Aponte J. C. et al. (2014) Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 131, 1-12. [3] Cooper G. et al. (2001) Nature, 414, 879-883. [4] Walker, J. F. Formaldehyde. 3d edn,  (Reinhold, 1964). [5] Cooper G. W. and Cronin, J. R. (1995) Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 59, 1003-1015. [6] Cooper, G., Sant, M. & Asiyo, C. J. Chrom. A (2009) 1216, 6838-6843. [7] Cooper G. et al. (2011) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 1401514020. [8] Cooper G, Sant M, and Asiyo C. (2015) Lunar Planet. Sci. Conf. Abs # 1832.       Figure 1.  GC-MS analysis of 3C and 4C sugar acids and enantiomers from selected meteorites. In all analyzed interior samples glyceric acid is racemic and threonic acid has D enantiomer excesses. The rare acid, 2-hydroxymethyl glyceric acid (HMG) is present in all but one sample. It is a possible oxidation product of its parent sugar, 2-hydroxymethyl glyceraldehyde, during formose reactions on the meteorite parent body.           Figure 2. GC-MS analysis of  4C and 5C sugar alcohols including enantiomer separation of D and L threitol from various meteorites. a, Murchison (Murch) 57. b, Equimolar standards of erythritol and threitol (total, D+L) run under the same GC chromatographic parameters as Murch 57. e., 5C Sugar alcohols from GRA 95229 compared to corresponding compounds in soil/dust. Soil/dust sample was extracted for 20 hours under ambient (air) atmosphere. The reduced analog of HMG (Fig. 2), hydroxymethylglycerol (HMGly) was observed in most samples. It is also a known product of formose reactions 2612.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
