 GEOLOGIC MAPPING OF PUTATIVE PALEOLAKE DEPOSITS IN A COPRATES CATENA, MARS. J. R. Martin1-2, B. M. Hynek2-3, and M. Chojnacki4, 1Dept. of Geology, Oberlin College, 2Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics & 3 Dept. of Geological Sciences, both at The University of Colorado-Boulder, 4Lunar and Planetary Lab, University of Arizona.  jmartin@oberlin.edu  Introduction:  The surface of Mars has many features that indicate it once had significant surface water.  The identification and study of these features offers us a better understanding of the role that water has played in the geologic history and the potential biologic history of the planet.  As part of a PGGfunded study to produce a 1:500,000-scale geologic map of the Coprates Chasma quadrangle [1], work has been started on a finer, 1:25,000-scale map of a catena in the region, slightly to the south of the main chasma (Fig. 1).  Preliminary mapping of the catena suggests that it hosted a former lake, as indicated by what appear to be laterally-continuous basal deposits, fan deposits, and phyllosilicate signatures.  This result is consistent with preliminary work on this catena by Weitz and Bishop [2]. Datasets: We utilized a 6 m/pix visiblewavelength CTX mosaic as a base map, 100 m/pix THEMIS daytime and nighttime IR data, and ~500 m/pix gridded MOLA map, and a 50 m/pix HRSC stereo-derived DTM for topographic information. We also have 25 cm/pix HiRISE coverage for almost 30% of the mapping area, and two HiRISE DTMs (1 m/pix). Mapped Units: The mapped units fall into four categories: Impact Crater Units, Plateau Units, Wall Units, and Interior Units (Fig. 1).  The Impact Crater Units were used to map and classify craters and associated materials into four stages of degradation.  The Plateau Units were defined to be consistent with the unit boundaries defined in the larger map [i.e. 1] but were mapped with finer detail.  The plateau in the region of the catena was divided into two units, which were interpreted to be lava flows and aqueously altered tephra deposits.  The Wall Units, which are comprised of wall rock not covered by talus, were divided into three units: a steep rocky unit at the top of walls, a shallower, talus forming unit, and a spur and ridge forming unit in the middle of the wall.  A vast majority of the wall was covered by talus.  The Interior Units comprised all the units in the interior of the catena and generally fall into two categories: mantling units that typically represent mass wasting/aeolian processes, and units that we believe are sedimentary material deposited in a lacustrine environment. Putative Lacustrine Units: Of particular interest are the Interior Units, as they contain the evidence suggesting a past lacustrine environment.  The units of interest are described as the "layered units", "fan material", and the "high albedo unit". Layered Units:  The layered units are a 600 meterthick stack of flat, terraced beds that cover most of the lower reaches of the catena (Fig. 1).   Contacts were drawn wherever a clear and continuous terrace existed, but this process was complicated due to incomplete terracing and varied surface expressions.  Each of the six layered units mapped is a coherent package of more finely layered materials sharing common characteristics.  The base of the sequence appears near the center of the catena, the topographically lowest part of the catena.  Near the base, the layered units are split into two mostly noncontiguous parts by surficial aeolian and fan deposits as well as the high albedo layer.  To the west (up section), the terracing is more complete, and many fine layers are evident.  Terracing is less clear on the east side (up section), but the layered nature of the deposits is still evident. The discontiguous layered packages on the west and east side show similar characteristics, so we tested lateral continuity across the gap by looking for layers with similar elevations and surface characteristics.  Based on lateral continuity and sub-horizontal stratigraphy that conforms to underlying topography, we infer that the layered deposits were deposited in a low-energy subaqueous environment. The layered units were likely once contiguous, and subsequently eroded in the central portion to provide the discontinuous terraces seen today. High Albedo Layer/Light Toned Layered Deposit: In the center of the catena at the base of the layered sequence is a high albedo deposit with a complex meter to decameter scale pattern of polygonal fracturing. This deposit is capped by one of the layered units (La2e in Fig. 1) and spans almost the entirety of the layered sequence, but was mapped separately due to the lack of terracing.  Weitz and Bishop [2] analyzed CRISM data of the deposit and found that the spectra were consistent with the Fesmectite nontronite.  The presence of clay minerals implies that there has been water in this area in the past. Fan Units:  Two fan deposits were mapped in the base of the catena, the largest being the fan that divides the layered units.  The semicircular shape suggests deposition following loss of carrying capacity when water traveling with some velocity  met the relatively still water of the lake [3-4], but does not have the steep slope characteristic of a Gilbert-type delta [3]. Topographic benches superimposed on the fans could have been caused by waves [3] or by changing lake levels [5]. Distributary channels are evident on the deposit.  The layered deposits are almost entirely below the top of the fan deposit, with the top of the layered sequence very close in elevation to the top of the fan deposit.  This provides further evidence of subaqueous deposition if the layered deposits do in fact represent paleolacustrine beds. Discussion: The sub-horizontal laterally continuous stratigraphy at the base of the canyon indicates a series of depositional events in a lowenergy subaqueous environment. The semi-circular shape and the benching of the fan deposit are additional indicators of subaqueous deposition. These features and the presence of water-altered minerals are all evidence for the past existence of a lake with a possible surface area of 170 km2 and volume of 70 km3.  Although we favor the interpretation of the catena floor deposits as a paleolake, there are potential issues with our interpretation.  First, there are no shorelines visible on the walls, but as Weitz et al. [3] point out for a different region, the walls in this catena are prone to collapse, as evidenced by the large amount of talus that covers the walls.  Secondly, in our interpretation of the geologic history, the terraced nature of the layered units stems from preferential erosion of the beds after deposition.  However, some of the terraces in the layered deposits seem similar to the terracing on the fan deposits.  This could mean that while some of the layered units are paleolake beds, others are delta-like fan deposits.  We believe that the complex stratigraphy in the catena is best explained by the existence of a past lake. More investigation of the area, particularly of the potential lake bed deposits, is necessary to properly explain the formation history of potential lakes in the catena and the subsequent modification of lake deposits. Acknowledgements: Funding for this work came from NASA PGG grant NNX14AN36G and the PGGURP program. Ongoing support is provided by the USGS mapping group.   References: [1] Chojnacki M. et al. (2016) LPSC (this meeting) [2] Weitz C. M. and Bishop J. L. (2015) LPS XLVI, Abstract #1383. [3] Gilbert G. K. (1890) Mem. U.S. Geol. Surv., 1. [4] Ori G. G. et al. (2000) J. Geophys. Res., 105, 17,629-17,641. [4] McCauley J. F. (1978) MAP I-897, U.S. Geol. Surv., Reston, Va. [5] Weitz C. M. et al. (2006) Icarus, 184, 436-451. Figure 1. Preliminary geologic map of the interior of the catena. 