2630.PDF
STRIKE-SLIP FAULTING ON GANYMEDE: MORPHOLOGICAL MAPPING AND FAILURE MECHANICS. M.E. Cameron1, B. R. Smith-Konter1, L. Burkhard1, R.T. Pappalardo2, and G. C. Collins3, 1University of Hawaii at Manoa, Department of Geology and Geophysics, mecamero@hawaii.edu, brkonter@hawaii.edu, liliane@hawaii.edu, 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory California Institute of Technology, Robert.Pappalardo@jpl.nasa.gov, 3Wheaton College, Physics and Astronomy Department, gcollins@wheatonma.edu.   Introduction: Ganymede exhibits two geologically distinct terrains known as dark and light (grooved) terrain. The mechanism for a transition from dark to light terrain remains unclear; however, inferences of strike-slip faulting and distributed shear zones suggest that strike-slip tectonism may be important to the structural development of Ganymede's surface and in this transition. Several key questions motivate this study: Is there an evolutionary sequence of strikeslip structures on Ganymede? What role may this play in the transition from dark material to grooved terrain? What are the faulting conditions (stress magnitudes, fault depths, ice friction and rheology) that permit strike-slip faulting? To investigate these questions, we first identify and map key examples of strike-slip morphologies (en echelon structures, strike-slip duplexes, laterally offset pre-existing features, and possible strained craters) from Galileo and Voyager images at grooved terrain areas (e.g. Nun Sulcus, Dardanus Sulcus, Tiamat Sulcus, Anshar Sulcus, Arbela Sulcus, and Uruk Sulcus) and terrains transitional from dark to light terrain (e.g. the boundary between Nippur Sulcus and Marius Regio, including Byblus Sulcus and Philus Sulcus). We then investigate the role of tidal stresses using the numerical code SatStress [1,2] to calculate both diurnal and non-synchronous rotation (NSR) tidal stresses at Ganymede's surface. Finally, we compute Coulomb failure conditions for selected mapped regions (e.g. Dardanus and Tiamat Sulcus) and consider tidal stress scenarios for both present eccentricity (0.0013) and possible past high (~0.05) eccentricity of Ganymede [3]. Summary of Results:  Morphological mapping.  Detailed structural interpretations suggest strong evidence of strike-slip faulting in the regions of Nun, Dardanus, Anshar, and Tiamat Sulcus. For example, the grooved terrain of the Dardanus region (Figure 1) is prominently marked by ~45 km of inferred rightlateral offset (of units 2 & 3) and is populated by several regions of en echelon structures [4,5,6]. We infer two primary stages of deformation at Dardanus: (D1) NE-SW extension (units 1-2); (D2) right-lateral shear between units 2-3. The grooved terrain of Tiamat (Figure 2) also displays inferred right-lateral offset (along units 9 & 11) and several regions of en echelon structures. Here, we infer three stages of deformation: (T1) NW-SE extension (units 1-3) and formation of unit 9; (T2) NE-SW extension of units 6-7, right-lateral shear and offset of unit 9, possible antithetic shear fracture formation of units 4-5; (T3) NNE-SSW right-lateral shearing of units 6-7 along unit 9. Deformation stages D1 and T2 share a similar extensional direction, as do D2 and T3, suggesting a possible link to their respective evolutionary sequences. We also infer similar relationships at Nun Sulcus.     Figure 1. Morphological mapping of Dardanus Sulcus: (a) Galileo imagery, (b) structural map and relevant rose diagrams.  Numbers represent major structural units, letters indicate strike-slip indicators.  2630.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
   Figure 2. Morphological mapping of Tiamat Sulcus: (a) Galileo imagery, (b) structural map and relevant rose diagrams. Numbers represent major structural units, letters indicate strike-slip indicators.    Stress Modeling. Global tidal stress models of both diurnal and NSR stress contributions readily generate shear and normal stress magnitudes that could give rise to shear failure at depth (Figure 3). Specifically, stresses at Dardanus and Tiamat predict a right-lateral sense of slip, in agreement with inferred offset from Galileo imagery observed at both regions. When considering stresses arising from diurnal + NSR contributions, our results suggest shear failure is possible for both Dardanus and Tiamat down to depths of ~1-2 km for both low friction (µf = 0.2) and high friction (µf = 0.6) cases. Changes in eccentricity between a past and present case cause only minor nuances of the failure stress (on the order of kPa); however, when considering stresses arising only from diurnal cycles, contributions from eccentricity are far more important. For Ganymede's present eccentricity, shear failure from the diurnal tidal cycle is not possible; alternatively, for a past, higher eccentricity, shear failure at very shallow depths (<200 m) and within isolated diurnal slip windows may have been be possible.   Figure 3. Coulomb failure stresses due to a combined diurnal + NSR stressing mechanism for (a) Dardanus and (b) Tiamat  Sulcus.  Coulomb stresses are presented as a function of depth for a past high eccentricity scenario. Gray segments represent shallow regions of high tensile stress not subject to Coulomb failure.   Conclusions: Detailed morphological mapping suggests strike-slip tectonism at both large and small scales may have played a key role in the development of Ganymede's complex surface terrain.  Moreover, diurnal and NSR tidal stressing mechanisms are sufficient to induce shear failure along at least two major strike-slip offset structures.  Tidal stress models suggest that while different failure scenarios may have existed throughout the evolution of Ganymede's eccentricity, with diurnal stresses likely dominating in the past and NSR stresses possibly dominating the present, the driving sense of shear (right-lateral in the two cases illustrated here) is preserved by both stress sources. Ongoing work is aimed at expanding our suite of failure stress models to study other major mapped strike-slip structures. These results, in addition to detailed structural interpretations of several other structures of interest, are being synthesized into a global database representing an inferred sense of shear for many of Ganymede's fractures. References: [1] Wahr, J. et al. (2009) Icarus, 200, 188-206. [2] Cameron, M. et al. (2013) LPSC XLIV, Abstract #2711. [3] Showman, A. P., R. Malhotra (1997), Icarus, 127, 93-111. [4] S. Murchie and J.W. Head (1988) JGR 93, 8795-8824. [5] G. Collins et al. (1998) LPSC XXIX, Abstract #1755. [6] R.T. Pappalardo et al. (1997) LPSC XXVIII, Abstract #1231. Additional Information:  This research is supported by NASA Outer Planets Research Program (NNX14AE15G). Government sponsorship acknowledged. 2630.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
