2649.PDF
VOLATILES AT THE LUNAR SURFACE: CONSTRAINTS FROM THE APOLLO ERA.  E. L. Patrick and K. E. Mandt, Southwest Research Institute (6220 Culebra Rd., San Antonio, TX 78238 epatrick@swri.edu).   Introduction: The Cold Cathode Gauge Experiment (CCGE), deployed to the lunar surface during Apollos 12, 14 & 15, measured the pressure of that tenuous ambient atmosphere[1]. Details regarding the composition of that surface-bounded exosphere (SBE) were made possible by three mass spectrometers – two from lunar orbit (A15 & A16) and one carefully placed at the lunar surface (A17). Laboratory mass spectrometry measurements conducted on a returned A11 lunar “soil” sample revealed a curious gas evolution feature not observed in an A12 sample[2]. Contamination was assumed to be the cause in this and other investigations targeting organic compounds and described Apollo spacecraft exhaust as the likely source of some observed signatures[3]. In December 2013, the Chinese Chang’e-3 lunar spacecraft landed and deployed its Yutu rover during operation of the Neutral Mass Spectrometer (NMS) aboard NASA’s orbiting Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Experiment Explorer (LADEE). A lack of detection by the LADEE NMS of any gas signature from the Chinese Chang’e-3 spacecraft not only suggested that closer scrutiny of earlier Apollo-era gas detection at and above the lunar surface was warranted, but also introduced the possibility that gases transported across the lunar surface may experience significant interaction and retention with the highly-active surfaces of regolith grains. Sources of Contamination: Some samples were taken from near the Lunar Module (LM), while others were taken from hundreds of meters away. The potential for sample contamination from artificial sources at each Apollo site during the missions was significant. Potential sources included engine exhaust products, outgassing spacecraft components & surfaces, deployed instrumentation, multiple cabin atmosphere depressurizations, and water “coma” from astronaut backpacks. We summarize these and what their impact may mean for future missions to the lunar surface. The Little Ion Gauge That Could: During the 2nd Apollo 12 extra-vehicular activity (EVA), astronaut “Pete” Conrad approached the CCGE to report on its orientation subsequent to the 1st EVA in which it had been deployed, as ground controllers reported performance below expectations for the gauge. Difficulties experienced with the gauge during its earlier placement suggested it may have shifted, fallen over, or perhaps the protective cover had not properly deployed. However, prior to the 2nd EVA, the gauge began recovering from its saturation condition due to a drop in the outgassing of gauge surfaces or local pressure at the Apollo site, and began recording a measurable ambient pressure. The first significant feature noted in the gauge response was the period in which the LM was depressurized producing a significant pressure jump. No extant data exist for the A12 CCGE, so the figure from the A12 Preliminary Science Report (PSR) was captured by plot digitization here as Figure 1.  Figure 1. Blue line represents pressure data from the Apollo 12 CCGE. Vertical red lines represent (1) the time at which the LM was vented and (2) the time at which astronaut Conrad announced he was standing over the gauge. The second significant feature in the pressure profile occurred in the time period surrounding the inspection of the instrument by Commander Conrad. During this period, the CCGE saturated for a period of less than 7 minutes. The rise from the ambient pressure baseline behavior took approximately 12 minutes. The fall to the presaturation pressure level took about half an hour, with the monotonic pre-saturation decay continuing for about 1.5 hours. The pressure response then became rather flat, with recovery to what could be called the general decay in pressure due to the ambient background taking several hours. The pressure then continued to decay for another 1.5 hours until the gauge failed after a total of approximately 14 hours of operation. Comparison of various significant mission events with respect to CCGE pressure readings required close comparison with gauge time stamps displayed in Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) and spacecraft time used in astronaut radio communications, much of which was restricted (“CLASSIFIED”) at the time the A12 PSR was prepared by the investigators. This feature labeled “Astronaut approached gage” in the report was closely scrutinized in order to determine what fraction of the measured gauge response might have been due to outgassing volatiles released by upturned surface regolith during the astronaut’s trek. 2649.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
However, based upon a close comparison between timestamps in the declassified mission transcripts for the depressurization of the LM and the time scale of the CCGE, it can now be shown that the gauge saturated, not due to the approach of the astronaut, but during the period in which he retreated from the site. Investigations of Returned Samples: Temperature programmed desorption (TPD) conducted on Apollo 11 sample 10086, taken from near the spacecraft, produced a peak in the scan of the quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) at mass 28 immediately upon heating above room temperature[2]. Due to limited resolution of the QMS, mass 28 appears as a typical but ambiguous feature in background mass spectra of laboratory vacuum systems often attributable to the interfering masses of both CO (27.995) and N2 (28.006). However, this ambiguity in the observed mass 28 appeared resolved when investigators seeking to identify organic compounds in lunar soil using a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer (GCMS) were also conducted on sample 10086 revealing the concentration of N2 to be 35 times higher than that of CO[3]. Trace ethylene (C2H4) at mass 28 (28.031) was also identified. The GCMS technique of Henderson et al.[3] used hydrogen fluoride gas (HF) to “demineralize” the sample, so the apparent N2 peak released by heating during TPD was the result of a chemical process during the GCMS analysis. TPD of Apollo 12 sample 12023 taken from over 150 meters away from the LM showed no evidence of N2[2]. Although the mass 28 peak produced during TPD was identified as “contamination” and attributed to N2, no source of contamination was identified, nor was any mechanism suggested for retention of N2 within the sample. Furthermore, we have found no retention of N2 in JSC-1A lunar soil simulant in numerous laboratory experiments[4](Figure 2).  Figure 2.Ten minute N2 gas pulse exposed to JSC-1A lunar soil simulant is followed by no detectable retention of gas upon valve closure. Questions concerning how regolith functions to trap gases from both above and below the lunar surface motivated our experiments simulating exposure of lunar simulants to various gases (N2, Ar, O2, CO, CO2) expected to contribute to endogenic and exogenic volatile inventories. This would include contamination byproducts from spacecraft (exhaust, outgassing, etc.). We present results that include a detailed analysis of the pressure response of the Apollo 12 CCGE, as well as pressure profiles resulting from exposure of JSC-1A lunar soil simulant to multiple gases. Future investigations will include observations of gas dosing of curated lunar samples. Supplementing our results, we conclude with questions and recommendations for future investigations of the lunar surface with implications for further in situ studies of lunar volatiles and their potential contribution to a long-term human presence on the Moon. Questions and Recommendations for Future Missions: 1. Impact and Landing Site Analysis: If nitrogen compounds can become trapped in lunar regolith, how long can such volatiles survive? Investigations of old landing sites (Surveyor 1), or recently discovered impact sites (A17 LM ascent stage) could reveal secrets of volatile retention with implications for the paleocosmic record within the regolith and its contamination by artificial sources. 2. Surface Monitoring of Artificial Impactors: Borrowed from the success of the LCROSS mission, a lunar lander could monitor artificial impacts within its zone of observation. Impactors of solid Cu would not only remove ambiguities from the composition of the resulting ejecta, but would also produce impacts of known energy and location. 3. Lunar Skylights: These entrances into the lunar interior now number over two hundred[5].  Are these a means of access to more refractory volatiles within the Moon’s interior that have survived its formation? 4. High Resolution Mass Spectrometry: Analytical chemistry of the lunar exosphere from orbiting spacecraft began with the Lunar Atmospheric Mass Spectrometer Experiment (LOMSE) aboard A15 & A16. Data included measurements of Ne, CO2 & H2O. The LADEE NMS more recently measured the presence of a number of atomic species (O, Na, Cl, K). Will fast, high-resolution mass spectrometers separate interfering peaks of atoms and molecules in the lunar exosphere to unambiguously reveal such sputtered atomic species as Al, Si, S & Ca? References:[1] Johnson F.S. et al. (1970) A12 PSR, 93-97. [2] Gibson E. K. and Johnson S. M. (1971) LPS II, 1351-1364. [3] Henderson W. et al. (1971) LPS II, 1901-1912. [4] Patrick et al. (2015) Icarus 255, 30-43. [5] Wagner R. V. and Robinson M. S. (2014) Icarus 237, 52-60. Acknowledgement: Supported by NASA ROSES LASER Grant #NNX14AN53G. 2649.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
