2659.PDF
METEORITE DISRUPTION WITH VARYING SPEEDS AND SIZES OF PROJECTILES.  S. J. Jack1, M. M. Strait1, G. J. Flynn2, and D. D. Durda3 1Dept. Of Chemistry, Alma College, 614 W. Superior St., Alma MI 48801 (jack1sj@alma.edu), 2Dept. Of Physics, State University of New York-Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh NY 12901, 3Southwest Research Institute, 1050 Walnut Street Suite 3400, Boulder CO 80302.  Introduction:  Asteroids collide with one another in space causing them to break apart. Some of the pieces are on a collision course with Earth and sometimes this course needs to be altered in order to prevent damage. By studying the disruption of meteorites a preventative measure can be taken by either disrupting the meteorite or redirecting its path [1]. Meteorites are made of various materials, some porous some granular. To see how these different compositions disrupt, specific components were evaluated  [2]. Pumice was used as an analog of the porous material found in meteorite because it is inexpensive and abundant [3]. The disruption of the pumice did not show much difference from meteorite disruption. However, it does sometimes crater at conditions where a meteorite disintegrates [4]. We have done multiple disruptions with the same  meteorite, NWA 869 an L3-L6 ordinary chondrite. We used varying speeds and projectile sizes to see what the resulting disruptions would yield.   Experimental Details:  The meteorite sample disruptions took place at the NASA Ames Vertical Gun Range in California. The sample was suspended in the middle of the sheet covered gun chamber with fishing  line. Foam core detectors with foils of various thicknesses were strategically placed around the sample to help determine particle sizes (Figure 1). The meteorite was impacted with an aluminum pellet ranging from 1/16 inch to 1/4 inch. After the disruption the foils and all the particles were collected. The foils were scanned using a PrimeFilm 7250 Pro3 scanner at 7200 dpi using the program CyberViewX. The image was then analyzed using ImageJ to count and measure the holes produced from the disruption. Excel was used to arrange the mass of the holes from largest to smallest. The collected particles were put through an eight layer sieve and weighed according to their size. The particle and foil data were combined into one document to produce a size frequency distribution graph. Results and Discussion:  From the collected data (Table 1), a slow, small projectile only shallowly cratered the sample, giving off a few small fragments and leaving the sample relatively intact. As the speed increased so did the number of particles produced.  However, the majority of the sample remained intact. When the size of projectile was increased, the sample disrupted completely resulting in a wide range of fragment sizes. As the speed increased with a large projectile there were smaller particles from the disruption decreasing the particle range very slightly. When the speed and size of the projectile were increased even more, the fragment sizes had the smallest range out of all the disruptions (Figure 2). When the data was compared to the pumice disruption from previous experiments, there were similarities such as they disrupted completely and produced a similar distribution of fragments. However, when pumice was shot at a slow speed the sample tended to form a fairly deep crater whereas the meteorite looked as if a piece was chipped off the surface. Based on the results from these disruptions, a better idea of how to deal with asteroids in space was established. If the asteroid only needs to be cratered or possibly its direction changed, a slow, small projectile will work. However, if the asteroid needs to be completely disrupted a fast, large projectile is necessary. Conclusion: The speed and size of a projectile effects how the sample will disrupt. Large and fast projectile will cause greater disruption creating a smaller range of particle size. Slower projectile will result in larger particles and a larger range of fragment sizes. However, the size of the projectile has more of an effect on the disruption than the speed of the projectile. Larger projectiles have more impact force to cause disruptions than smaller projectiles. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by NASA Planetary Geology and Geophysics Program Project Number 10-PGG10-0051. Additional support is provided by Alma College. Thank you to the personnel at the NASA Ames Vertical Gun Range for helping with all of the shots. References: [1] Flynn G. J. et al. (2009) Planetary and Space Science, 57, 119-126. [2] Durda D. D. and Flynn G. J. (1999) Icarus, 142, 46-55. [3] Flynn G. J. et al. (2014) LPSC XLV, Abstract #1950. [4] Jack S. J. et al. (2014) LPSC XLV, Abstract #2430.  2659.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
 Figure 1: The set up of the gun chamber. White sheets covered the chamber to make clean up more efficient. The sample was hung in the middle at a height so it would be in the projectile's path. Detectors were placed around the sample at specific locations. The can detectors were in place for another experiment to collect particles at different times during the disruption.  Table 1: The speed and size of the projectile with which the meteorite sample was impacted.    Figure 2: Distribution of particles from different disruption settings. Note the change in slope as the projectile changes size and speed. 2659.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
