 Cartography at the Edge of the Solar System Ross A. Beyer1,2, Paul Schenk3, Stuart Sides4, Ken Edmundson4, Kristin Berry4, Jeffrey Moore2, Hal Weaver5, Leslie Young6, Kimberly Ennico2, Cathy Olkin6, Alan Stern6, and the New Horizons Science Team 1Carl Sagan Center at the SETI Institute, 2NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA (Ross.A.Beyer@nasa.gov), 3LPI, 4USGS, 5JHU APL, 6SwRI Prior to the New Horizons flyby of the Pluto system this past summer [1] the only kind of map for Pluto and Charon came from HST data [2], and we could only speculate on the types of surface features that we might see [3]. As such, there is no established cartographic reference for Pluto or Charon, aside from that currently defined by the IAU based on ephemerides, not surface characteristics [see 4]. Data: We made use of the New Horizons LORRI and MVIC data for purposes of establishing a control network and cartographically controlling the data. Images prior to one Pluto rotation (approximately seven days prior to closest approach) were of low enough resolution that they were not helpful in providing identifiable features for matching and were also superseded by images that covered the same area but with better resolution nearer to closest approach. SPICE data is key to this work [5, 6]. At the time of the flyby only predict kernels were available which had discrepancies when used with the images that were taken, and required extra manual effort to make use of in that period. As expected, the reconstructed SPICE kernels provided 90 days after the encounter provided a more accurate description of the position and pose of the spacecraft. However, while those kernels were a significant improvement, there was often still a slight mismatch of the reconstructed SPICE position and the actual location of the object (see figure 1, again, as expected). Figure 1: P LORRI FULLFRAME (lor 0299123689) showing an offset of about 14 pixels from where the SPICE data calculate the limb and where it is in the image. Geometric Correction Method: Images were brought into the ISIS [7] system and associated with their reconstructed SPICE information. Due to current limitations in the way that ISIS treats framing cameras and line-scan cameras, the LORRI and MVIC data had to be worked with independently. LORRI network: All LORRI images for a body (the same method was used for both Pluto and Charon) were inspected and image to image control points were assigned with the ISIS qnet program. Where possible, a control point was located on a feature that was identifiable in many images and a 'measure' was added for each image. This way control points were not just image pairs, but consisted of the same feature in multiple images, which provided for better control solutions. Once selecting control points was completed, the ISIS bundle adjustment program jigsaw [8] was used on all of the LORRI images to adjust only the instrument pointing parameter (but not the spacecraft position). We found that we got improved results when we also let jigsaw solve for the local radii of the given control points, rather than forcing the program to leave them fixed at a surface of average radius for the body. This process resulted in a pointing solution for each LORRI image that allowed robust mosaicking. Practically, the result of this process is an improved SPICE C kernel that describes the updated spacecraft pointing at the time of each observation. A controlled LORRI mosaic was then created from this control solution. MVIC network: Ideally, the above process would also include MVIC images such that the bundle adjustment process in jigsaw would operate on a pool of control points that connect both LORRI and MVIC images. However, they must be treated separately. The MVIC images were inspected and given control points in a similar fashion, such that control points representing a feature were identified in as many MVIC pan and color bands as possible. However, in order to get these images to match the LORRI solution, we used qnet to identify the LORRI mosaic as a 'Ground Source' such that the locations of features in the LORRI mosaic were treated as known control points. This resultant control network that contained MVIC to MVIC control points, as well as MVIC to LORRI mosaic ground control points was then given two runs through jigsaw. The first run did not solve for camera pointing, but only adjusted the spacecraft position. The second run of jigsaw was then allowed to solve for cam  Figure 2: Mosaic of LORRI images of Pluto. era angles and their angular velocities as well as update spacecraft position. This produces a pointing (CK) and spacecraft location (SPK) solution for each MVIC image that allows reprojection of the individual MVIC color bands together to allow for registered color mosaics, as well as allowing mosaicking of MVIC and LORRI products together. Photometric correction Method: We use the equations in [9] to make an approximation from instrument DN to I/F values. We also used the photomet program with a lunar Lambert photometric function to correct for the changing observation angles due to planetary curvature within a scene. This process allowed for much better seam matching and more visually consistent mosaics. References [1] S. A. Stern, et al. The Pluto system: Initial results from its exploration by New Horizons. Science, 350(6258), 2015. doi:10.1126/science.aad1815. [2] M. W. Buie, et al. Pluto and Charon with the Hubble Space Telescope. II. Resolving Changes on Pluto's Surface and a Map for Charon. Astronomical Journal, 139:1128-1143, 2010. doi:10.1088/0004-6256/139/3/1128. [3] J. M. Moore, et al. Geology before Pluto: Pre-encounter considerations. Icarus, 246:65-81, 2015. doi:10.1016/j. icarus.2014.04.028. [4] A. Zangari. A meta-analysis of coordinate systems and bibliography of their use on Pluto from Charon's discovery to the present day. Icarus, 246:93-145, 2015. doi:10.1016/ j.icarus.2014.10.040. [5] C. Acton, et al. SPICE: A Means for Determining Observation Geometry. In EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting 2011, #32. 2011. [6] C. H. Acton. Advances in SPICE Support of Planetary Science. In Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, volume 44 of Lunar and Planetary Inst. Technical Report, page 1224. 2013. [7] L. Keszthelyi, et al. Utilizing the Integrated Software for Imagers and Spectrometers (ISIS) to Support Future Missions. In Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, volume 45 of Lunar and Planetary Science Conference. 2014. [8] K. L. Edmundson, et al. Jigsaw: The ISIS3 bundle adjustment for extraterrestrial photogrammetry. ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, I-4:203-208, 2012. doi:10.5194/ isprsannals-I-4-203-2012. [9] Joe Peterson, et al. New Horizons SOC to instrument pipeline ICD. In A. F. Cheng, editor, LORRI Jupiter Encounter V1.1, NH-J-LORRI-3-JUPITER-V1.1. Planetary Data System, 2007. 