2706.PDF
Photoclinometric Reconstruction of the Apollo Metric Camera Imagery. Ara VNefian1, Uland Wong1,Oleg Alexandrov1, and Randy Kirk2, 1SGT, NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, MoffettField, CA, USA (ara.nefian@nasa.gov),2United States Geological SurveyPhotoclinometric techniques can process in a highlyautomatic manner the wealth of orbital images retrivedby NASA missions and generate high-resolution extensive coverage digital elevation models (DEM) that areextremely detailed and relevant, even when compared tothe most advanced stereo reconstruction techniques. Inessence this increase in resolution is possible because thephotoclinometric technique extracts the elevation information from image metadata and local pixel informationrather than from correspondences between image blocksin the stereo pairs. The highly accurate and increasedresolution maps are used in planetary science, missionoperations, rover navigation and localization.IntroductionPhotoclinometric reconstruction (or shape from shadingreconstruction) of the imagery attempts to estimate theparameters of the image formation model that includesurface albedo and elevation. Each pixel of the orbitalimages is formed by a combination of many factors, including albedo, terrain slope, exposure time, shadowing,and viewing and illumination angles.Image Formation, Modeling and ReconstructionThe shape-from-shading problem is formulated as finding a set of 3D points that minimize the cost functionQ =∑k∑i,j∈M(Ikij −AijRkijT k)2 (1)where k is the number of images, i and j are the rowand column number respectively, I is the image, Aij isthe albedo corresponding to pixel ij and M is the setof pixels remaining after the binary shadow mask. Thereflectance model Rij is given byRkij = (1− L(α)) cos i+ 2L(α)cos icos i+ cos e. (2)whereL(α) = 1 +Aα+Bα2 + Cα3. (3)and α is the phase angle measured in degrees, A, B, C aset of goven coefficients, e and i are the emission andincidence angles respectively. The optimal set of 3Dpoints Mij are estimated using the iterative Gauss Newton method for the cost function Q described in Equation 1. Given a 3D point Mij corresponding to pixel ij,at consecutive iterations its 3D position is re-estimatedaccording to one of the following rulesMij = M(0)ij + ∆mijM(0)ijM (0)ij . (4)Mij = O + ∆mijvijvij  (5)where mij is a corection factor estimated iterativelythrough Gauss Newton algorithm. Equation 4 corresponds to a parametrization along the height in aDEM representation while Equation 5 corresponnds to aparametrization along the rays vij from the optical centerof the image (O) through each pixel at location ij in theimage. The increment ∆mij is the solution to the normalequations:e = B∆mij (6)wheree = JT rB = JTJand r is the residual vector and J the Jacobian matrix asdescribed next. Let the image be arranged row-wise in avector such that l = i ×W + j where W is the imagewidth. Then the residual vector and Jacobian matrix canbe written asr =. . .(Il − Fl). . .. . .J =∂F0∂h00 . . . . . . . . .∂F1∂h0∂F1∂h10 . . . . . .0 ∂F2∂h1∂F2∂h20 . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . 00 ∂Fl∂hl−w 0∂Fl∂hl−1∂Fl∂hlwhere Fl = AijRijT .Experimental ResultsA set of preliminary tests for the above mentioned are illustrated for Apollo Metric Camera (AMC) images. Figure 1 illustrates a 200 × 200 pixel region of the AMCimage from Apollo 15 landing site scanned at 10m perpixel. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the hillshaded shape from2706.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
2Figure 1: Original cropped image.shading reconstruction using the Gauss Newton solutiondescribed by Equations 5 and 4 on the image shown inFigure 1 respectively. Figure 4 illustrates the hillshadedFigure 2: Hillshaded reconstruction using the GaussNewton optimization technique for camera parametrization.reconstruction of the complete AMC image of the Apollolanding site.Figure 3: Hillshaded reconstruction using theGauss Newton optimization technique for elevationparametrization.Figure 4: Hillshaded reconstruction using theGauss Newton optimization technique for elevationparametrization of the Apollo 15 landing site.2706.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
