2714.PDF
Tectonics of Charon Ross A. Beyer1,2, Francis Nimmo3, William B. McKinnon4, Jeffrey Moore2, PaulSchenk5, Kelsi Singer6, John R. Spencer6, Hal Weaver7, Leslie Young6, Kimberly Ennico2, Cathy Olkin6, AlanStern6, and the New Horizons Science Team. 1Carl Sagan Center at the SETI Institute, 2NASA Ames ResearchCenter, Moffett Field, CA, USA (Ross.A.Beyer@nasa.gov), 3UCSC, 4WUStL, 5LPI, 6SwRI, 7JHU APLCharon, Pluto's large companion, has a variety ofterrains that exhibit tectonic features. The Pluto-facinghemisphere that New Horizons [1] observed at high resolution has two broad provinces: the relatively smoothplains of the informally named (as are all names in thisabstract) Vulcan Planum to the south of the encounterhemisphere, and the zone north of Vulcan Planum. Thisarea is characterized by ridges, graben, and scarps, whichare signs of extensional tectonism. The border betweenthese two provinces strikes diagonally across the encounter hemisphere from as far south as −19◦ latitudein the west to 25◦ in the east (Figure 1).The lower-resolution views of the non-encounterhemisphere are also suggestive of other potential largeridges and troughs, indicating that the tectonic expressions we see so well on the encounter hemisphere likelyextend around Charon.Relief exceeding 10 km is seen in limb profiles andstereo topography, presumably the result of the bearingstrength of cold water ice and Charon's modest gravityFigure 1: C LORRI FULLFRAME observation ofCharon showing the smooth southern plains and the tectonized zone north of that, which continues northward asexpressed by the irregular northern limb.(0.288 m s−2). Charon's tectonic terrain is exceptionally rugged and and contains a network of fault-boundedtroughs and scarps in the equatorial to middle latitudes.This transitions northward and over the pole to the visible limb into an irregular zone where the fault traces areneither so parallel nor so obvious, but which contains irregular depressions (one as deep as 10 km just outside ofMordor Macula) and other large relief variations.Chasmata: There are a number of chasmata that generally parallel the strike of the northern margin of VulcanPlanum, and we will discuss the largest two here as theyhave slightly different characters.Mandjet Chasma (Figure 2) is at least 450 km longand typically 30 km across. It was not identified early onbecause it does not have a sharp topographic rim, but agentle slope as its walls transition from the surroundingplains and then plunge 7 km to its floor.Figure 2: Perspective view of Mandjet Chasma lookingwestward to the limb, North is to the lower right. Mandjet starts in the lower left of the frame and extends to thelimb in the upper right. The scarp along the left side ofthe frame south of Mandjet bounds Vulcan Planum.Serenity Chasma (Figure 3) is 40 to 50 km wide rimto-rim and is almost 200 km long, with a maximum reliefupwards of 5 km. At its eastern end where the southernrim terminates against the Vulcan Planum boundary, itsnorthern rim continues another 200 km east as a southfacing scarp and becomes segmented by fault ramps. We2714.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Figure 3: Serenity Chasma. Scale bar is 50 km.measured topographic profiles across the classic rift valley shape of Serenity and used them to estimate the elastic thickness of the lithosphere at 1.5 to 5 km. This, inturn can be used to estimate the heat flux. However,the resultant number is large compared to any conceivable long-lived radiogenic contribution, indicating thatthe elastic lithosphere is probably much thicker today,and that the observed flank topography is not a flexuralresponse.Scarps: There are a number of scarps which appear tobe the trace of a single normal fault without a complementary facing normal fault that would make a graben.The zone north of Vulcan Planum has a much larger number of these than graben, with a variety of expressions.There are small relief, parallel structures that are reminiscent of grooved terrain on other icy satellites resultingfrom bookshelf faulting, as well as large, south-facingscarps with several kilometers of relief that bound Vulcan Planum. There are also some scarps that appear todelineate larger crustal blocks.Conclusions: We interpret this ensemble of features tobe the structural expression of normal faults and graben,representing substantial tectonic extension of Charon'sicy crust on the order of 1%. Several large craters aresuperposed on the chasmata, indicating that this extension is geologically old. Given the horizontal and verticalscale of these structures, steeply dipping normal faultsare likely to extend to depths of 10s of kilometers. Thetectonic record is consistent with global expansion. Thespatial distribution of tectonic features is not readily reconciled with the kinds of patterns expected from tidal ordespinning stresses [2]. Charon may have had an ancientsubsurface ocean that subsequently froze, which couldhave generated this global set of extensional features.References[1] S. A. Stern, et al. The Pluto system: Initial results from itsexploration by New Horizons. Science, 350(6258), 2015.doi:10.1126/science.aad1815.[2] J. M. Moore, et al. Geology before Pluto: Pre-encounterconsiderations. Icarus, 246:65-81, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2014.04.028.2714.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
