 EVIDENCE FOR AN IMPACT ORIGIN FOR SEDIMENTS IN GALE CRATER, MARS. D. M. Burt1 and L. P. Knauth2, 1,2ASU School of Earth and Space Exploration, P.O. Box 871404, Tempe, AZ 85287-1404, 1dmburt@asu.edu; 2Knauth@asu.edu. Introduction: The Curiosity Rover (Mars Science Laboratory or MSL) on Mars has, since 2012/08/06, been traversing what was, well before its landing [1], interpreted from orbital data to be the distal end of a basin-filling alluvial fan near the bottom of Gale Crater on Mars, where erosion, transport, and deposition were assumed to have been carried out by water or wind. Not surprisingly, all rocks observed directly by MSL to date have been classified according to this narrow prior expectation [2][3], that is, as aeolian (if fine-grained and cross-bedded), alluvial (if coarser grained, whether rounded and sorted or not), or lacustrine (if extremely fine-grained, whether bedded or not). This classification appears to have been based almost entirely on depositional features such as bedding and grain size. Numerous features that appear to conflict with these narrow terracentric interpretations appear to have been ignored or discounted, as have been alternative depositional processes that might be particularly appropriate for early Mars, such as deposition by mass wasting of crater walls (e.g., long run-out debris or mud flows) or deposition by regional- or planet-modifying impact cratering. Discounting the influence of widespread impact cratering on early Mars seems particularly surprising, inasuch as cratering is the dominant surface-modifying process in the solar system and remains a dominant geomorphic agent on Mars. Contradictions in the Existing Gale Interpretation: The main aspect of the Gale rocks that seem to contradict the terracentric story is their mineralogy and geochemistry. All of the Gale Rocks apparently had about the same primary mineralogy and geochemistry, corresponding to typical martian basalt (and alkaline differentiates) [4]. Primary compositional differences can be interpreted as resulting primarily from differential physical sorting of grains of diffent types [4]. Mineralogical and geochemical features involving water apparently originated after sediment deposition, that is, diagenetically only. These postdepositional aqueous processes were, for the most part, limited in effect and extent and consisted mainly of disseminated clay minerals and salt growths (visible as crystal pseudomorphs and dendritic concretions) in fine-grained rocks and late salts, mainly Ca-sulfates, growing in fractures. Postdepositional surfical alteration (to silicic compositions) apparently also occurred extremely locally, along fractures and in one unit, possibly caused by acid surficial fluids [5]. Similar post-depositional silicic surface alteration was seen by MER-A near Home Plate in Gusev Crater. These features, in that they all occured after deposition, appear to conflict with the terracentric story. Where is the geochemical and mineralogical evidence for initial weathering to mud-sized particles, and for alteration by the flowing and standing water of streams and lakes? Basalts on Earth tend to react extremely rapidly with naturally acidic waters to form clay minerals, far more rapidly than terrestrial rocks that are richer in Si and Al. On Mars the ancient atmosphere is believed to have consisted mainly of acid-generating CO2 with variable SO2, so that ancient martian waters should have been even more acidic and reactive than terrestrial waters. Why were there no aqueous chemical reactions to clays until, apparently, after sediment deposition? Was it too cold? If so, note that the authors [3] go to great lengths to exclude periglacial climates as having contributed significantly to Gale sedimentary features (e.g., there are no observed traces of ice wedges, moraines, or lacustrine dropstones), although, in an apparent inconsistency, they compare a small outcrops of fine layering to varves in a periglacial lake. In this regard, shale, made up predominantly of fine clay minerals, is the normal lake or alluvial plain sediment on Earth; it seems to be completely lacking in the fine-grained so-called lacustrine mudstones of Gale Crater, which, by mineralogy and geochemistry, could have been deposited nearly anhydrously (i.e., as martian dust). Shale observations also seem to be lacking anywhere else in Gale Crater. Multiple other contradictions exist. Why are the presumed aeolian deposits (as in the 0.7 m thick "Shaler outcrop" ) quite thin, relatively poorly sorted, intimately interbedded with supposed fluvial deposits, and typified only by low-angle crossbeds? These features seem atypical for aeolian deposits, including in those dunes currently being traversed by MSL. Why did the postulated streams (based on orbital data) never produce, at any scale, diagnostic lateral and vertical sedimentary facies variations, such as exposed flow channels containing gravels, despite abundant exposures of gravelly rocks? Why did the putative standing lake waters that were interpreted as having dried up multiple times never leave diagnostic dessication cracks or discrete evaporitic salt layers, not to mention paleo-shorelines?  Why is there absolutely no evidence of dewatering textures (such as load casts, a type of soft-sediment deformation resulting from uneven compressional dewatering) in any of the sediments that were interpreted has having been under water when deposited and as having undergone compressive dewatering afterwards? Such obvious features would be present in almost any sequence of terrestrial sediments deposited and dewatered under the postulated water-soaked conditions. Impact Sedimentation: An Alternative Interpretation: A viable alternative to making early martian sedimentation extremely earth-like and wet is to consider sedimentation resulting from distal impact processes. Impacts and secondary impacts on the airless Moon produced ground hugging debris flows that surged outward for up to 600 km [6]. Their seismic waves generated long runout landslides from the walls of older craters. Impacts on objects with a significant atmosphere, such as that of early Mars, or signicant subsurface volatiles, also produce base surges (a fartravelling type of density current somewhat analogous to a terrestrial dust storm) that can generate the extremely pervasive low-angle crossbedding observed now by all three rovers [7][8]. The full range of basaltic grain sizes, glassy tectites and glass fragments, shattered and shatter-coned rocks, metallic meteorite fragments, and a variety of melt spherules and accretionary lapilli that resemble concretions are also produced by impacts, and most have already been reported from inside Gale Crater [9]. Note that the volatile-rich and salt-rich nature of the Martian surface implies a greater volume of impact-generated glass on Mars than on the much drier Moon, because these components act as natural fluxes. The current attempt to totally terrestrialize ancient Mars depositional environments therefore appears to be completely unnecessary. Everything observed so far in Gale Crater is consistent with known impact and other blast processes followed by minor amounts of surface and subsurface aqueous alteration (including highly local acid alteration and leaching, itself possibly generated by condensation of impact-generated S-rich vapors). None of the contradictions mentioned above (fresh basaltic compositions, even for "muds", climate inconsistencies, post-depositional aqueous alteration only, and that relatively localized and minor, lack of diagnostic depositional and post-depositional features that would indicate the assumed aqueous depositional environments) apply if impact sedimentation is responsible for the sequence of beds. Impact-derived deposition (the blast bed hypothesis [8]) also accounts for relatively abrupt grain-size variations in outcrops, relatively poor sorting, even in "muds" and supposedly aeolian sands, highly variable rounding in gravels, extensive sequences of beds with original dips (draped-over and plastered-on"sticky" sequences), high contents of grains that appear amorphous or glassy (impact glasses [10]), localized-only post-depositional clay minerals and related amorphous phases (preferentially altering olivine and metastable impact-derived basaltic glass), the ubiquity of low-angle cross-beds in beds covering a wide range of grain sizes (although high-angle cross-beds can form locally under favorable conditions), planar rather than channel-shaped scours (unconformities caused by energetic later impacts), local beds with shrinkage cracks caused by cooling and/or dehydration, and so on. Conclusions: For the above reasons, the thick sequence of beds observed to date inside Gale Crater may well be an ideal place to study details of an impact-dominated stratigraphic succession virtually unhindered by the tectonic, weathering, and diagenetic processes that have erased or obscured such ancient sections from early Earth. Once formed, the deep depression of Gale Crater probably acted as a natual trap for density currents derived from various-sized impacts over the full history of Mars, although later ones may have been scoured away by deflation. It may even preserve a record of impact sedimentation that occurred as Mars was losing most of its atmosphere. As others have hypothesized [1], there may well be an aeolian-dominant succession of strata higher in the statigraphic section in Gale. If there is an aqueously-deposited (rather than altered) part of the section, it apparently hasn't yet been encountered. If it is present, it probably underlies the part of the section that the Curiosity rover has been able to examine, and drilling would be needed to explore it. References: [1] Anderson R.B. and Bell III J.F. (2010) Mars J. 5, 76. [2] Grotzinger J.P. et al. (2014) Science, 343, 1242777-1. [3] Grotzinger J.P. et al. (2015) Science 350, aac7575. [4] McSween H.Y. (2015) Am. Mineral. 100, 2380. [5] Frydenfang, J. et al. (2015) AGU Fall, P43B-2119. [6] Wilhelms D.E. (1987) USGS Prof. Paper 1348. [7] Knauth L.P. et al. (2005) Nature, 438, 1123. [8] Burt D.M. et al. (2015) LPSC 46, Abstr. 2838. [9] Newsom H.E. et al. (2015) Icarus 249, 108. [10] Cannon K.M. and Mustard J.F. (2015) Geology 43, 635. 