 IMPACT-DRIVEN TECTONISM DURING THE HADEAN. CJ O'Neill1, S. Marchi2, S. Zhang1 , B. Bottke2, 1Macquarie Planetary Research Centre, Macquarie University, craig.oneill@mq.edu.au, 2 Southwest Research Institute, Boulder.   Introduction:   Impacting was arguably one of the dominant process in shaping planetary surfaces during early solar system evolution, and while its effects on volcanism and crustal evolution of  other planetary bodies has been documented, its effects on early Earth dynamics remain poorly constrained. Here we introduce tectonic simulations of an evolving Earth, beginning immediately post-magma ocean, and track their evolution through the Hadean. We include not only waning heat production, and a parameterised core model, but also an evolving impact flux based on solar system accretion models. We find large impacts during the Hadean both weaken the lithosphere, and create a large thermal anomaly in the mantle, capable of driving transient tectonic activity. Our preferred models demonstrate waning tectonic activity with diminishing impact flux from 4.5-4.3Ga, a lull in tectonic activity from ~4.34.1Ga, and a resurgence of tectonic activity at ~ 4.1Ga due to the effect of a thick, dense, subductable lithosphere, and increased impact flux at this time.  Our calculated magnetic field strength drops to 15-50% of the current field strength from 4.3-4.1Ga, and rises to around current levels with the resurgence in tectonic activity at 4.1Ga - in line with recent paleointensity measurements on Hadean zircons. We also predict a rise in melt flux at 4.1Ga, in line with Hadean zircon age populations. Impact-driven tectonism reconciles evidence from some zircon populations of tectonic activity, with short-lived isotope constraints, which suggest the Hadean to Eoarchaean was largely stagnant.    Figure 1. Response of the early Earth to an extreme (1700km radius) impact event. The large impact drives wholesale recycling of the proto-lithosphere.  Figure 2. Upwelling induced by large impact event, at 15Myr evolution since the model's inception.    