 Assessing the Geologic Evolution of Greater Thaumasia, Mars with Chemistry and Mineralogy.  D.R. Hood1, T. Judice1, S. Karunatillake1, D. Rogers3, J. Dohm4, J.R. Skok5,1,  1Geology and Geophysics, LSU, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, 2Geology and Geophysics, LSU, Baton Rouge, LA 70803 (dhood7@lsu.edu), 3Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 4University Museum, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 5SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA    Introduction:  Karunatillake et al. [1] defined "chemical provinces" on Mars using the Mars Odyssey Gamma Ray Spectrometer (MOGRS)-derived 5°×5° chemical maps of the Martian midlatitudes. Each chemical province is a broad area delineated by contiguous bins for which individual compositions deviate by more than 1 standard deviation from the global average for two or more elements. In this work, we focus on provinces 70, 75, and 90. Based on the geologic mapping investigations [2]-[4], province 90 primarily includes late Hesperian lava flow materials near the summit of Syria Planum. Province 75 includes a large part of the southeastern flanks of Syria Planum, composed largely of Hesperian lava-flows. Province 70 is distinct from provinces 75 and 90, in that it includes Coprates Rise mountain range and the eastern part of the Thaumasia Highlands mountain range, as well as the transition zone between Tharsis and Argyre basins. The transition zone includes fluvial, alluvial, colluvial, and possibly glacial materials. Figure 1: Color-coded chemical provinces of Mars. Our regions of interest are provinces 70 (dark green), 75 (light green) and the portion of 90 (yellow), boxed in red. From Karunatillake 2009 [1] We characterize Greater Thaumasia in terms of chemistry, mineralogy, and geologic age. Given the regional scale of Thaumasia, this work uses chemical maps derived from MOGRS, and mineralogical characterization from thermal infrared spectroscopy (i.e., Mars Global Surveyor Thermal Emission Spectrometer, TES, sourced), allowing regional scale and decimeters depth sensitivity, while possibly retaining the local outcrop-driven mineralogical insight from TES. We also employ the latest geologic information compiled by Tanaka et al [2] for preliminary geologic insight. Based on the collective observations, driven primarily by composition, we assess the implications to existing hypotheses concerning the geologic evolution of this region of Mars informally referred to here as Greater Thaumasia . Data and Methods: Compositional comparison of Greater Thaumasia with average Mars relies upon the suite of chemical maps derived from MOGRS such as Al, Ca, Cl, Fe, H, S, Si, K and Th. For comparisons of chemical subdivisions within Thaumasia, we focus on the four elements - H, K, Si, and Th - that highlight the provinces, in order to estimate proportions of enrichment and depletion that may in turn provide insight into the nature of processes.  Modified Box-and-Whiskers: Among statistical tools, we use modified box-and-whisker comparisons [5] to characterize the distribution of chemical compositions from GRS data of one province relative to the distribution of elements in a second province. Along with global comparisons which compare chemical provinces of Greater Thaumasia to the elemental chemistry of the martian crust (Rest of Mars, ROM, derived from MOGRS data), we characterize chemical trends across three chemical provinces, 70 (Thaumasia), 75 (Solis), and 90 (Syria), within Greater Thaumasia.  The ratios of some elements such as Fe/Si (major rock-forming elements, siderophiles, and lithophiles), K/Th (large ion lithophiles), and Cl/H2O (key volatiles) help us determine the comparative likelihood of igneous, mass dilution, and chemical alteration effects.  Mineralogical Characterization: Mineralogic characterization of the surface from infrared spectra complements the MOGRS-based chemical characterization,   particularly given the vastly different sampling depths of the instruments. Even though such mineralogy may not unambiguously constrain elemental composition [6], [7], it has been reported that it can establish whether the surficial mineralogy is representative of the chemical composition at depth [8], [9]. We seek collocated chemical signatures in TES (mineral) and MOGRS (chemical) data that may provide further support for the chemical anomalies in this broad region.  Discussion: Greater Thaumasia varies in a compositionally compelling manner trending to the southeast outwards away from the complex shield volcanoes, towards and through the Thaumasia Highlands and Coprates Rise mountain ranges, including the transition zone. Depleted K and Th distinguish the NW margin of Greater Thaumasia (province 90), followed by a spatially overlapping signature of H depletion and Si enrichment in the central part ( province 75), and solely H depletion and Si enrichment at the SE part (province 70). The latter extends beyond the Thaumasia Highlands mountain range to the east and southeast to include the transition zone. The Thaumasia highlands and Coprates Rise mountain ranges are located in the midsection of the H depletion and Si enrichment province.  Mineralogical Results: Mineralogical mapping indicates the presence of a distinct IR spectral signature in SE Thaumasia, termed Aonium-Phrixi by Rogers et al [9], consistent with more extensive olivine fractionation in bedrock relative to the rest of the highlands [10]. Analysis of infrared reflectance spectra in SW Thaumasia also indicates the presence of serpentine in the northwest part of the Thaumasia Highlands, referred to informally as Claritas Rise [11], which could reflect hydrothermal alteration of ultramafic rocks as discussed by Ehlmann et al. [12]. TES mineralogical analysis shows that the westernmost region of Thaumasia Planum contains proportionally more highcalcium pyroxene (HCP) than the ROM. In addition, some portions of Thaumasia Planum contain high-silica phases (e.g. opal, zeolites, or poorly crystalline silica). Mantling by fines reduced TES-coverage in chemical province 75 and especially 90, though the bulk chemistry does not suggest more than optically thick fines mantles. Mineral abundance, while consistent with the mineralogical overview by Rogers and Hamilton [7], does not reveal the regional compositional trends to the extent evident in MOGRS data. This may relate to the local variability in composition overwhelming regional and bulk signature evident from the MOGRS-based observations.  Figure 2: An example of the modified box-andwhiskers plot comparing Province 90 and the Rest of Mars (ROM). Note the enrichment in Al and Si, Depletions in K and Th and elevated K/Th ratio.  The study area serves as a partial regional analog to what Balta and McSween [13] modeled more globally for the temporal evolution of martian magmatism. While inconsistencies exist in the specifics of compositional trends, our observations suggest the regionalscale existence of global magmatic evolution. We also see the possibility of a yet a more felsic basement, including the mountain-forming rocks of the Thaumasia Highlands and Coprates Rise [11], [14]. This contrasting model will require further testing through continued geologic investigation and combined spectroscopic and geophysical analyses.  References: [1] S. Karunatillake, et al, J. Geophys. Res., vol. 114, no. E12, p. E12001, Dec. 2009. [2] K. L. Tanaka, et al, "Geologic map of Mars." p. 3292, 2014. [3] J. M. Dohm et al, Planet. Space Sci., vol. 47, no. 3-4, pp. 411-431, 1999. [4] J. M. Dohm, et al, "Geologic map of the Thaumasia region, Mars: U.S. Geological Survey Geologic Investigations Series I2650, 3 sheets.," 2001. [5] S. Karunatillake, et al, J. Sci. Comput., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 439-451, Aug. 2011. [6] A. D. Rogers et al, J. Geophys. Res., vol. 113, p. E06S14, 2008. [7] A. D. Rogers et al, J. Geophys. Res.  Planets, vol. 120, no. 1, pp. 62-91, 2014. [8] M. B. Wyatt et al Lunar Planet. Sci., vol. 38, pp. 30-31, 2007. [9] A. D. Rogers, et al J. Geophys. Res., vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 1-29, 2007. [10] A. D. Rogers, et al J. Geophys. Res., vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 1-18, 2007. [11] J. M. Dohm, et al, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., vol. 185, no. 1-2, pp. 139-156, Aug. 2009. [12] B. L. Ehlmann, et al, J. Geophys. Res., vol. 114, no. E00D08, pp. 133, Oct. 2009. [13] J. B. Balta, et al, Geology, vol. 41, no. July, pp. 1115-1118, Jul. 2013. [14] J. M. Dohm, et al, in Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 2015, vol. 46, pp. 5-6. 