2743.PDF
MINERAL ASSOCIATIONS IN ENSTATITE CHONDRITES: POSSIBLE INSIGHTS INTO MINERALS ON MERCURY. S. V. Kaufman1,2, C. M. Corrigan1, T. J. McCoy1, E. S. Bullock3, 1Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, Mineral Sciences Department, 2Fredonia State University of New York, Geosciences Department, 3Carnegie Institution of Washington.  Introduction:  The parent body for enstatite chondrites and the planet Mercury share many elemental characteristics, as discovered by MESSENGER. Both bodies have high abundances of magnesium and volatile elements such as sulfur, potassium, sodium, and chlorine [1-4]. Due to their similarities, the two bodies are thought to have formed under similar conditions in the same area of the protoplanetary disk. Thus, enstatite chondrites may provide a useful proxy for determining the mineral phases that host elements on Mercury [5].  Djerfisherite, a potassium sulfide [6] [K6(Fe, Cu, Ni)25S26Cl], has been suggested as a host for chlorine on Mercury [4]. Djerfisherite is hypothesized to form through the sulfidization of roedderite [6], the potassium silicate [(Na, K)2(Mg, Fe)2[(Mg, Fe)3Si12O30]. Roedderite crystallizes under peralkaline conditions [(Na+K)/Al>1 on an atomic basis]. Both minerals form in highly reducing environments such as those thought to have been present during the formation of enstatite chondrites and Mercury [5]. While the composition of Mercury is not peralkaline, the possible association of djerfisherite and roedderite could provide insights into the mineralogy and petrogenesis of the planet.   Although the association of roedderite and djerfisherite in enstatite meteorites has been suggested, few studies have critically examined this relationship. In this study, we examine occurrences of these phases in enstatite chondrites to assess their mechanism of formation.  Methods:  Thirty-eight enstatite chondrites were analyzed using reflected light microscopy in order to optically search for djerfisherite.   Of those 38, only seven contained djerfisherite. These seven were analyzed using the semi-quantitative electron dispersive spectrometry (EDS) mapping feature of the FEI Nova Nano SEM 600 scanning electron microscope (SEM) based in the Department of Mineral Sciences at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History. Five of these meteorites were determined to contain roedderite. Of these five, three EH3 meteorites - ALHA 77156, ALH 84250, and MIL 07139 - had obvious associations between the roedderite and djerfisherite. Obvious associations were defined as instances where the minerals were touching or in very close proximity with the hypothesized reaction minerals, such as sodium feldspar, in between. Results and Discussion:  Mineral associations suggest three possible modes for the formation of djerfisherite and roedderite.    As found in the Pena Blanca Spring aubrite and suggested for the formation of djerfisherite in enstatite chondrites by [6], the co-existence of roedderite and sodic feldspar could suggest evolution of the silicate melt composition.  While roedderite requires peralkaline conditions, feldspar requires metaluminous melts.  The co-existence of these phases suggests melt evolution from peralkaline to metaluminous causing resorption of roedderite.  Elements (notably K) become incorporated into the subsequently crystallizing djerfisherite, as well as sodic feldspar, enstatite, and, in some cases, diopside.  This texture is observed in two of the three enstatite chondrites (Figure 1).   Figure 1.    False color image of djerfisherite (blue) and roedderite (purple) with Fe,Ni metal (yellow), feldspars (red), daubreelite and troilite (green), and enstatite (organe) in ALH 84250.  The irregular border of djerfisherite may suggest resorption and formation of roedderite.   While a changing silicate melt composition is required to explain the co-existence of roedderite and plagioclase, sulfidization/de-sulfidization (Figure 2) reactions may also help explain the transition from roedderite to djerfisherite. If roedderite crystallizes early, an increase in sulfur fugacity - perhaps resulting from sulfur enrichment in the melt during crystalliza2743.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tion - might allow crystallization of djerfisherite instead of other K-bearing phases (e.g., potassium feldspar).   Figure 2. False color image of djerfisherite (blue), roedderite (purple) and sodic feldspar (red) with metal (yellow) and enstatite (orange) in ALHA 77156.  The transition from roedderite to djerfisherite might require both evolving melt compositions and sulfidization.   In some cases, djerfisherite and roedderite co-exist in the absence of any other silicate or sulfide phases, at least in the two dimensions of the thin section (Figure 3), trapped in Fe,Ni metal.   This strongly suggests that the trapped melt was both peralkaline and sulfur-rich and the two phases co-crystallized from this melt.     Figure 3.  False color image of co-crystallization of djerfisherite (blue) and roedderite (purple) in Fe,Ni metal (yellow) in ALH 84250.  Future Work:  Although we have documented the occurrences of roedderite and djerfisherite, quantitative mineral analyses would allow us to better assess possible reactions, particularly given the occurrence of Na and K in subequal abundances in roedderite [6].  If early crystallization of roedderite is an essential first step for the formation of djerfisherite through either chemical evolution of the melt or sulfidization/desulfidization reactions, the identification of djerfisherite as the carrier of chlorine on Mercury could alter our view of melt evolution on that planet.   Neither the surface of Mercury as a whole nor any of the distinct geochemical terranes [7] are peralkaline.  However, bulk enstatite achondrites (aubrites) are also not peralkaline, yet roedderite occurs in aubrites [8], suggesting an early peralkaline phase to melt evolution.   The best opportunity to determine the carrier of chlorine may be provided by the Mercury Radiometer and Thermal Infrared Spectrometer (MERTIS) to be flown on the BepiColombo mission to Mercury [9]. Mid-infrared spectroscopy has already proven useful for constraining feldspar composition and may prove equally useful in detecting the presence of other minerals indicative of the petrogenesis of Mercury.           References: [1] Nittler et al (2011) Science 333, 1847-1850. [2] Peplowski et al. (2011) 333, 18501852. [3] Peplowski et al (2014) Icarus 228, 86-95. [4] Evans et al (2015) Icarus 257, 417-427. [5] McCoy and Nittler (2013) Treatise on geochemistry [6] Fuchs (1966) Science 153: 166-167. [7] Weider et al. (2015) EPSL 416, 109-120.   [8] McCoy and Bullock (2016) Planetesimals Chap. 12 (in press), [9] Hiesinger et al. (2010) Planetary Space Sci.  58, 144-165. 2743.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
