 INVESTIGATING CHANNEL MORPHOLOGIES IN THE EASTERN OLYMPUS MONS REGION OF MARS: IMPLICATIONS FOR VOLCANIC AND FLUVIAL PROCESSES. S. S. Sutton1, C. W. Hamilton1, and J. E. Bleacher2. 1Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona 1629 E. University Blvd., Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (ssutton@lpl.arizona.edu), 2Planetary Geodynamics Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD  20771 USA.  Introduction: There are many channelized flows that are sourced from fractures and fissures in the Tharsis region of Mars. Examples of these features commonly occur near the eastern margin of Olympus Mons, in surfaces that are ~20-200 Ma [1]. Previous work has noted that fluvial and volcanic flows may have emanated from these fissures [2-4]. The goal of this work is to describe the interrelationships between source fissure geometry and channel morphologies. This, in turn, will enable us to model fluid rheology and flux to test hypotheses regarding forms of recent volcanic and/or aqueous activity on Mars. Study Area: We have mapped channel networks, fractures, volcanic vents, and flow sources to the east of Olympus Mons (Fig. 1) and identified 46 potential sources of lava and/or aqueous floods. The study site examined here contains two fissure systems, designated Regions A and B (Fig. 2). Region A shows evidence of erosion that may be due to fluvial processes (Fig. 3, right), whereas Region B (Fig. 3, left) is distinctly volcanic [5]. The contrasting channel morphologies, and close proximity of these two systems, makes this an ideal study site for investigating volcanic versus fluvial channel formation. Additionally, both systems are relatively pristine with minimal overprinting and degradation. Data and Methods: We have constructed new Digital Terrain Models (DTMs) from Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter's Context Camera (CTX) [6] and High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE) [7] stereo images. The CTX and HiRISE DTMs have postings (i.e., effective horizontal resolution) of 24 m and 1-2 m, respectively. All stereo images were controlled to Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA) Precision Experiment Data Records (PEDRs) [8] to achieve consistency with regional topography [9]. DTMs are generated using USGS Integrated Software for Imagers and Spectrometers 3 (ISIS3) and BAE Systems SOCET Set [10]. A base mosaic of 6 m/px CTX images was generated using the USGS map projection on the web services [11].  Figure 1 identifies the major geological units in our study area: (1) Ulysses Fossae/Plains, (2) Plains Lavas, (3) Olympus Mons Lavas, and (4) Olympus Mons Aureole Deposits. Additionally, we have mapped the location of channels and fractures as well as vents associated with small shield volcanoes (i.e., Tharsis Vents), and Flow Sources that have erupted lava or other fluids, such as water or mud flows. Our facies maps focus on the inset region in Figure 1 and include flow units and boundaries, channel margins, and structural features such as fissures. Additionally, we have used the DTMs and associated orthomosaics to quantify channel profiles, calculate channel sinuosity, and compare channel floor depths to the elevations of the surrounding surfaces to determine if erosion has occurred. Figure 2. Overview of study area, corresponding to inset area in Fig. 1. CTX and HiRISE stereo coverage shown within each region. ! 6! Additionally,!PI!Hamilton! is! leading! the!preparation!of! a!publication! related! to! "fill!and!spill"!lava!emplacement!for!Fall!2014;!CoKI!Bleacher!is!leading!a!manuscript! related!to!streamlined!islands!within!lava!channels!on!Earth!and!Mars!for!Fall!2014;! and! PostKDoctoral! Researcher! Scheidt! is! leading! a! methodology! paper! related! to! KAP!MSVP!for!Spring!2015.!! This!year!we!have!also! completed!preparations! for!our! second! field! campaign,! which! will! be! to! Iceland! in! August! 2015.! This! field! campaign! will! enable! us! to! examine!sinuous!channels!within!the!Laki!lava!flow!as!an!analog!for!highKdischarge! rate!lava!flows!on!Mars.!The!field!team!will! include!PI!Hamilton!and!PostKDoctoral! Researcher!Scheidt,!who!will!be!accompanied!by!other!scientists! (at!no!additional! cost!to!this!project).!! !Tasks% 3a% and% 3b:% Examination% of% sinuous% channels% in% Elysium% Planitia% and% Tharsis.! Progress!on!these!tasks!has!been!proceeding!steadily,!aided!by!the!development!of! new!stereoKderived!DTMs!within!Elysium!region!and!continued!mapping!of!sinuous! channels! and! their! geological! context! in! both! Elysium! Plantia! and! Tharsis! (generated! as! part! of! Task! 1).! The! main! focus! has! been! on! a! series! of! channels! located! east! of! Olympus! Mons! (Fig.! 7).! To! date! we! have! completed! the! regional! mapping! and! detailed! (1:50,000Kscale)! maps! for! one! of! the! two! key! channel! locations.! Mapping! for! the! second! channel! system! is! underway! and! will! be! completed!as!part!of!the!related!publication!during!the!3rd!year!of!the!project.! !! !! Work! related! to! sinuous! channels! on! Earth! and! Mars! by! PI! Hamilton! was! also! incorporated!into!the!following!invited!review!paper:! !Baker VR, CW Hamilton, DM Burr, V Gulick, G Komatsu, W Luo, JW Rice Jr., and JAP Rodriguez (2015) Fluvial Geomorphology on Earth-like Planetary Surfaces: A Review. Geomorphology, in press.!  Figure 7. Geological map showing the location of channels, fractures, volcanic vents, and flow sources east of Olympus Mons. We have completed a detailed (1:50,000-scale) map of the channel system shown in the upper left cyan box (see Fig.1 for additional detail); and are working on a second 1:50,000-scale map, and HiRISE-derived DTM for the channel system shown in the lower right cyan box. This work will be published in Year 3.   Figure 1. Geological map showing the location of channels, fractures, volcanic vents, and flow sources east of Olympus Mons. Inset shows the focused study site locations, with Regions A and B in boxes. A A B   Results: Our geologic mapping shows that channels are associated with fissures within the Plains Lavas unit, which surrounds exposures of the Aureole Deposits. We have identified 88 volcanic vents and 46 flow sources. Channel orientations are controlled by a slight regional topographic gradient, with a drainage divide located just south of our focused study area. Many of the linear fractures in the study site are parallel to each other and trend NW-SE. Our facies map of Region A shows two types of channels, based on the classification scheme presented in [5]. These channels are of Types 1 and 3. Type 1 channels are sinuous, non-branching, and relatively narrow. They are intepreted to be partially drained lava channels [5]. Type 3 channels are broader and shallower with relatively smooth channel edges. Type 3 channels are also sinuous, downcut below the elevation of the surrounding plains, and contain streamlined islands and longitudinal bedrock textures. The fissure system in Region A is branching, with theater-headed curvilinear intersecting segments. Type 3 channels are interpreted to be of fluvial origin [5]. Type 1 and 3 channels are both sourced from fissures in Region A, with Type 3 channels crosscutting, and in turn being crosscut by fissures and flows that host Type 1 channels. This implies an alternating sequence of volcanic and aqueous flooding events.  Region B includes one example of a Type 1 channel and no Type 3 channels. Instead, the region is dominated by the presence of Type 2 channels [5], which exhibit irregular inner channel margins, have raised inner edges (i.e., levees), and channel floors that do not downcut below the elevation of the surrounding plain. These channels are wide at their sources and narrow down the flow. Channel Type 2 is interpreted to be of volcanic origin [5]. The main fissure that fed the channels in Region B has a linear en-echelon geometry. The fissure trends SE-NW and crosscuts the channels in Region A, which implies that the fissure and associated flows and channels in Region B are younger than those in Region A. Interpretation and Discussion: High resolution images and DTMs reveal key differences in terms of the fissures that feed Type 1 and 2 channels, relative to the systems that feed Type 3 channels. We interpret that these differences are related to the geometry of associated magmatic intrusions, with dikes generating linear en-echelon fractures that locally feed lava flows where the dike intersects the surface [12,13]. In contrast, the arcuate, radially branching fracture systems appear to feed fluvial-like channels [2,3]. In Region A, the branching fracture pattern also seems to be associated with an upwarping of the topography (Fig. 3). If this uplift is associated with the intrusion of magma, then heat transfer may have mobilized groundwater or ice to produce an outburst flood and fluvial-like erosional channels at the surface [2].   The observed relationships between channel type and fissure morphology provide a framework in which to test models of magma emplacement [12]. For instance, the alternating emplacement of dikes and sills in the region may be due to changing states of stress in the crust around Olympus Mons. Dikes ascending toward the surface and generating linear graben and lava flows would be favored when the compressive stresses associated with the subsidence of Olympus Mons are relatively low (e.g., after the development of new thrust faults [1]), whereas stalled magma in the upper crust may have formed sills, which provided a broad subsurface heat source that mobilized ground water or ice, thereby releasing water to the surface and carving the outflow features observed in Region A [14]. Conclusion:  This work provides new morphologic evidence for lava flow emplacement and fluvial activity on Mars during the Late Amazonian. The timing and interaction between magma and subsurface ice or liquid water is also significant for understanding the past and present climate of the planet as well as how magmatic intrusions can interact with subsurface water to trigger aqueous outflows and surficial erosion.  References: [1] Basilevsky, A. et al. (2006) GRL, 33, 13. [2] Mouginis-Mark, P. (1990) Icarus, 84. [3] Plescia, J. (2003) Icarus, 164-1.  [4] Carr, M. (2006) The Surface of Mars, Cambridge Univ. Press. [5] Hamilton, C. et al. (2014) LPSC XLV, Abs. #1555. [6] Malin, M. et al. (2007) JGR, 112-E5, E05S04. [7] McEwen, A. et al. (2007) JGR, 112-E5, E05S02. [8] Smith, D. et al. (2001) JGR, 106-E10. [9] Kilgallon, A. et al. (2015) LPSC XLVI, Abs. #2373. [10]  Kirk, R. et al. (2008) JGR, 113, E00A24. [11] Hare, T. et al. (2013) LPSC XLIV, Abs. #2068. [12] Klimczak, C.  (2014) Geology, 42-11. [13] Rubin, A. (1992) JGR, 97-B2. [14] Mège, D. & Masson, P. (1996) Planet. Sace Sci., 44-12. Figure 3. Left: Region B detail. Colorized elevation from HiRISE DTM overlaid on CTX base mosaic. White rectangle outlines nearby HiRISE stereo pair footprint. Right: Region A detail. CTX DTM colorized elevation map. North is up in both panels. 