2777.PDF
Testing of Stereophotoclinometry (SPC) Software in Support of the OSIRIS-REx Mission.  J. R. Weirich1, E. E. Palmer1, and R. W. Gaskell1, 1Planetary Science Institute, 1700 E Fort Lowell Suite 106, Tucson, AZ 85719.   Introduction:  Stereophotoclinometry (SPC) code written by Dr. Gaskell [1] will be used to build a digital shape model of Bennu for navigation and science as part of the OSIRIS-REx mission. SPC has been used for numerous bodies such as Eros, Phobos, Mimas, Lutetia, Itokawa, Vesta, comet 67P, and the Moon [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9], but the absolute performance of the software has not been fully characterized. In support of the OSIRIS-REx mission, we are testing the maximum capabilities of the software using a computer generated “fake” Bennu for which we have generated synthetic images following OSIRIS-REx's baseline observing campaign. With these images we can use the SPC software to construct a “model” Bennu and compare it against the source Bennu, or the “truth” model. Thus, we can compare the starting “truth” Bennu to the constructed “model” Bennu and determine the quality of the model via differences such as deviation from the "truth" model as well as formal uncertainty.  Basics of SPC:  Building of the shape model begins by covering the surface of the asteroid with a series of control points and square topographic representations we call "maplets." Typically these maplets overlap by ~30%. We start by using maplets at low resolution, but they are successively improved until the desired resolution is reached, usually at the same resolution of the images. Each of these maplets will have images assigned to them. The images are then aligned to each other using features such as craters, boulders, and/or albedo features. Once aligned, these images are used to solve for the stereo position of the center of the maplet. Thus, the center of the maplet is very well determined. To solve for the points between the centers of maplets we use photoclinometry [10]. The center of each maplet is deterministically solved via traditional geometric stereo, so the center is more accurate than the edges. However, because the maplets overlap each other, information is shared between the maplets minimizing systematic error. The advantage of using SPC instead of just using stereo is that SPC can provide an accurate height for every pixel in an image. From testing, we have shown that the accuracy of SPC is comparable to the image resolution.  Optimizing the SPC solution:  1D, single-image photoclinometry has significant limitations [10] that are minimized by using the multi-image, 2D technique generated by Gaskell [1].  Optimizing the illumination and observing conditions used in this analysis is difficult to implement as well as describe -- emission and incidence angles are insufficient to fully describe the necessary geometries. One of the necessary constraints is a wide variety of spacecraft positions and sun vectors. This is achieved by different surface-to-spacecraft angles and surface-to-sun angles. We present this information using polar plots, Fig. 1. The center of the   Figure 1: Polar plot showing zenith angles (radius) and azimuth angles (“theta”). A range of azimuth angles such as above is needed to obtain highquality results. Top: Spacecraft position; Bottom: Sun position. Example Example 2777.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
plot represents the center of a maplet, and the "theta" angle represents azimuth from north (0 to 360°). The distance from the center is how far from zenith the spacecraft (or sun) was when the image was taken (zenith angle). 0° is directly overhead and 90° is on the horizon. Each green dot represents an individual image observation for both Sun and Spacecraft position. The goal is to have illumination and observation geometries in a wide range of azimuths.  From testing, the zenith angles are effective if between 30-45°.  Lessons Learned:  We have found that the root mean square (RMS) accuracy (found by comparing the “model” versus “truth”) approaches the image resolution and is mostly independent of the maplet resolution. Furthermore, features that are 1-4 pixels in size in the imagery are insufficiently represented by SPC. Features that are 5-7 pixels are reasonably well represented, and features that are 10 times the image resolution are well represented. Fig. 2 shows this result graphically. The red line is a vertical profile of the topography across the “truth” surface with a sampling distance of 5 cm, and represents significant highfrequency signal. The black line was generated by SPC with maplets of 5 cm ground sample distance using images with 0.5 cm pixel size, and is much smoother. Craters are well represented in SPC once the model is mature. When the SPC model is based upon a single maplet, it cannot flex aggressively enough to fully represent steep slopes. As the model is improved, overlapping small maplets are used to fully describe the shape of the crater, making it well represented. The center point of every maplet is set in 3D space by geometric stereo, and as such, its position is extremely well defined, as shown in Fig. 3.   Planned Tests:  The following mission required products will be generated and evaluated prior to spacecraft launch in the Fall of 2016. • A global shape model with a ground sample distance (GSD) of 75cm using synthetic Approach (1m PolyCam) and Preliminary Survey (16cm PolyCam and 50cm MapCam) images. • A 35cm global shape model using synthetic images from Detailed Survey (5cm PolyCam).   • 5cm GSD digital terrain models (DTM) of the candidate Touch-and-Go (TAG) maneuver sites using 0.5cm pixel size PolyCam images from Orbit B. • Ultra-high resolution DTMs of features that will be used for natural feature tracking having a GSD down to 1cm for select areas of the surface.  References: [1] Gaskell R.W. et al. (2008) MAPS 43, 1049-1061. [2] Roberts J.H. et al. (2013) AGU Fall, #P23E-1831. [3] Ernst C.M. et al. (2015) LPS, A1832. [4] Gaskell R.W. et al. (2009) AGU Spring, #P13A-04. [5] Jorda L. et al. (2011) EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting. p776. [6] Gaskell R.W. et al. (2006) LPS, A1876. [7] Gaskell R.W. et al. (2012) DPS, #209.03. [8] Gaskell R.W. (2014) DPS, #209.04. [9] Gaskell R.W. (2011) LPS, A1608. [10] Kirk R.L. (1987) Cal. Inst. of Tech. Ph.D Thesis.   Figure 3: Left; Green is truth, red is model. A single maplet poorly represents the crater. Right; Green is truth, each segment of red is an individual maplet. Due to more stereo tie points, a much better topographic representation is achieved. The mismatch between the edges of the red maplets has been exaggerated for illustrative purposes.  Figure 2: Red is “truth”, black was generated by the SPC software. The SPC generated model smooths out some of the high-frequency signal.  2777.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
