 The  W.  M.  Keck  Cosmochemistry  Laboratory  at  the  University  of  Hawai'i  at  Mānoa.  G. R. Huss, K. Nagashima, A. Thomen and A.N. Krot, Hawai'i Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, 1680 East-West Road, Honolulu, HI 96816, USA ghuss@higp.hawaii.edu.    Introduction: State-of-the-art analytical equipment and the laboratories that support them are the cornerstones of cosmochemistry. These laboratories have driven much of the technological advancement in sample analysis for cosmochemistry geochemistry, nuclear forensics, and related fields of materials science, both in the US and abroad. Cosmochemistry research has provided much of the intellectual framework for designing NASA missions to other planets, comets, and asteroids. The unique requirements for analysis of extraterrestrial samples, which are small and mass limited, drive this field, and the highly skilled people working in this field facilitate the work. The current state of the art has been achieved through continuous funding of a core set of these laboratories over the past 40 years. The continuation of this high level of capability and skill, which is necessary to maximize the scientific return from samplereturn missions such as Stardust, Genesis, and Hayabusa, and which will be necessary for analysis of future samples to be returned from asteroids, comet, Moon and Mars, requires continued robust support of these laboratories. What took 40 years to create can be destroyed in a few years if funding levels are insufficient. The W. M. Keck Cosmochemistry Laboratory at the University of Hawai'i was created in 2006 using funds from NASA, the W. M. Keck Foundation, and UH in about equal proportions. The centerpiece of the laboratory is a Cameca ims 1280 ion microprobe, which is supported by a JEOL 5900 LV scanning electron microscope, a JEOL JXA-8500F Field Emission electron microprobe (operated separately), optical microscopes, and sample preparation facilities. The ion probe has been upgraded with a unique solid-state imaging detector called SCAPS. The laboratory is funded by user fees; all users, including this abstract's authors, pay the same user fees for time on the ion probe, electron probe, and SEM.  User Base: Users of the W. M. Keck Cosmochemistry laboratory come from all over the world; more than 50 scientists have used the ion probe since 2006. During the period from 2010 to 2015, ~66% of the time was used by HIGP researchers, ~9% by other UH researchers, ~12% by other US scientists, and ~13% by scientists from Europe, Japan, Singapore, India, and Australia. We do not operate this laboratory as an analytical facility, which we define as a place where users come for standard analyses performed for a standard fee, the product of which is a data set that the user can use as they see fit with no further obligation to the facility. We operate in a collaborative research mode, in which those who wish to use the laboratory arrange with the staff to make measurements that are of interest to both the user and the laboratory personnel. We try to do cutting edge science, investigating problems of significant interest to the broader community and taking advantage of the unique capabilities of our laboratory. These projects are almost never routine and often require significant development of analytical capabilities. The hourly rate covers some of these development costs, but often the visiting scientist or the UH collaborator use their research funds to support the measurements over and above the user fees. Scientific Results from the W. M. Keck Cosmochemistry Laboratory: Since the lab opened in 2006, 58 peer-reviewed publications have appeared based on data from our laboratory (another ~10 papers are working their way through the publication process). These include 4 papers in Science, 2 in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1 in Nature Communications, 22 in Geochemica et Cosmochemica Acta, 11 in Astrophysical Journal, 12 in Meteoritical & Planetary Science, and 3 in Earth and Planetary Science Letters, among others. These are all high-impact journals. Over 250 abstracts have also be published based on our data. Our work has resulted in significant changes in the way we view the origin of the solar system. It motivates research in our group and in other groups around the world.  Here are some highlights. Impacting bodies through time: Joy et al. (2012) [1] reported direct detection of projectile relics from the end of the lunar basin-forming epoch. Prior to this work, we had no way to study the types of materials that were impacting the Earth, Moon, and other planets in the past. The lead author and her collaborators identified several unusual clasts in lunar regolith breccias that were lithified at more than 3.4 Ga. We made high-precision, in situ, O-isotope measurements of these tiny clasts and identified several that could not have come from the Moon. Although these clasts included chondritic materials, they are not as diverse as meteorites currently falling on Earth, suggesting that the mix of materials impacting the terrestrial planets was different before 3.4 Ga than it is today. This study used Apollo samples, skilled petrography, and our state-of-the-art equipment to open a window on the material impacting the Earth at 3.4 Ga. Earth's primordial water: This past fall, Hallis et al. (2015) [2] reported direct evidence of primordial water from the Earth's deep interior with very low D/H. We measured D/H in melt inclusions from olivine grains in lavas from Baffin island that originated in a mantle  plume. Our data indicate the existence of a reservoir in the Earth's mantle with δD lower than -218 ‰ (relative to VSMOW). Such a low value suggests that the Earth's interior may have inherited its water directly from the solar nebula. If true, then much of Earth's water did not come from comets or asteroids as has been widely believed. This project was a collaboration between the UH NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI) and the W. M. Keck Laboratory. NAI paid the salary of the lead author and the analytical costs, and the Keck Laboratory provided the equipment and expertise and developed the analytical protocol to carry out the measurements. This study could not have been done without our fully functioning stateof-the-art laboratory. Samples from the Stardust Mission: In 2012, we reported the mineralogy, chemical and O-isotope composition, and Al-Mg systematics in a 23×10×15 µm Stardust particle named Iris [3]. Iris's characteristics indicate that it formed in the inner solar system at least 3 Myr after CAIs, the earliest solar system objects. Its presence in comet Wild 2 suggests that Jupiter, a barrier to largescale transport of small objects between the inner and outer solar system, did not form until more than 3 Myr after CAIs. This work required development of a reversible sample mounting technique that we have used for additional measurements of Iris and other particles. We reported these new results in 2015 [4] along with the first O-isotope data on <2 µm-sized particles from the wall of a Stardust track. The O-rich aerogel served as the standard, and the particles were measured using ion imaging. This work showed that <2 µm Stardust grains span the entire range of O-isotope compositions observed in other solar system materials. The question now is whether these grains represent debris from the inner solar system or are part of its raw material. Successful measurements of Genesis collectors: In 2012, we reported data on the N-isotope composition of the solar wind [5]. The measurements were made on a bulk solar wind collector to resolve a discrepancy between two labs, one of which found solar wind nitrogen to be enriched by 30% in 15N and the other of which found it to be depleted by~40%. Our results showed that the solar wind is depleted in 15N, a result confirmed by later measurements of the concentrator target. We have also measured D/H in the solar wind, lowering the upper limit on D/H compared to other sample-based measurements [6], and we report at this meeting final data for the H fluence in the Genesis collectors [7]. Although there was an initial consensus that the Genesis Mission was a failure because of its crash into the Utah desert, we can now measure many elements in the Genesis collectors by ion microprobe using techniques such as backside profiling and ion imaging, and soon, all primary and secondary objectives of the mission will have been achieved. This scientific return is only possible because of the state-of-the-art laboratories that were already in place and functioning when the Genesis samples came back.   Impact of advanced instrumentation on planetary science and cosmochemistry: As mentioned above, the instrumentation that was developed to analyze extraterrestrial samples has advanced the state of the art for all types of sample analysis. This is because extraterrestrial samples are small and rare and have characteristics that other samples simply to do not have. A small group of people have devoted their careers to developing this capability. The technology has diffused into other fields, such as terrestrial geochemistry, materials science, and nuclear forensics (a field which would not exist without the technical capabilities developed for extra-terrestrial samples). The knowledge gained from laboratory-based studies has provided the intellectual framework for much of planetary science. Many instruments that have been and are being developed for spacecraft are attempts to duplicate on the spacecraft the capabilities that have been developed on Earth. But these instruments will never be as capable as terrestrial laboratories, which is why NASA and space agencies in other countries are planning and carrying out sample return missions to asteroids, comets, and Mars. This highly successful terrestrial laboratory enterprise can only continue with robust financial support. These laboratories are not just expensive, they depend on expertise developed over decades. This intellectual heritage must be maintained so that instrumentation and capabilities can continue to evolve. These laboratories serve the community only in an environment of continuous progress and innovation. We operate our laboratories in a collaborative mode because most of the community's needs are not routine. A few facilities will not satisfy the needs of a community that needs constantly improving analytical capabilities.  References: [1] Joy K. H., Zolensky M. E., Nagashima K., Huss G. R., McKay D. S., Ross D. K. and Kring D. A. (2012) Science 336, 1426-1429. [2] Hallis L. J., Huss G. R., Nagashima K., Taylor G. J., Halldorsson S. A., Hilton D. R., Mottl M. J., and Meech K. J. (2015) Science 350, 795-798. [3] Ogliore R. C., Huss G. R., Nagashima K., Butterworth A. L., Gainsforth Z., Stodolna J., Westphal A. J., Joswiak D. and Tyliszczak T. (2012) Astrophys. J. 745, L19. [4] Ogliore R. C., Nagashima K., Huss G. R., Westphal A. J., Gainsforth Z. and Butterworth A. L (2015) Geochim Cosmochim. Acta 166, 74-91. [5] Huss G. R., Nagashima K., Jurewicz A. J. G., Burnett D. S. and Olinger C. T. (2012) Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 47, 1436-1448. [6] Huss G. R., Nagashima K., Burnett D. S., Jurewicz A. J. G. and Olinger C. T. (2012) LPS XLIII, #1709. [7] Koeman-Shields E., Huss G. R., Jurewicz A. J. G., Burnett D. S. and Olinger C. T. (2016) LSP XLVII, #2800. 