2802.PDF
INFLUENCES OF TOPOGRAPHY ON LAVA COOLING AND FLOW DYNAMICS: APPLICATION TO MARS LAVA FLOWS.  S. A. Fagents1, S. M. Baloga2, and L. S. Glaze3, 1Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 1680 East-West Rd., Honolulu, HI 96825, fagents@hawaii.edu; 2Proxemy Research, Laytonsville, MD; 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD.   Introduction: The cooling history of lava encountering variable topography exerts substantial influence over the emplacement and final morphology of the flow.  For example, lava flowing over a break in slope is likely to experience disruption of the solid surface crust, exposing the hot flow interior and promoting enhanced radiative cooling of the flow.  Furthermore, any substantial lateral deviation in flow direction (e.g. at a channel bend or meander) may also disrupt the surface crust and induce similar cooling. The rheological consequences of this enhanced cooling may then be manifested as recognizable changes in flow morphology. We have developed a new flow model that accounts for such effects, for application to both terrestrial flows for which remote sensing data document the enhanced cooling [1], as well as to planetary flows in order to constrain key flow parameters such as effusion rate and eruption duration. Model Description: Our model combines two physical approaches to investigate the influence of topographic variability on the emplacement of flows. One approach is based on the thermal dynamics before and after the flow encounters a slope break (Fig. 1) or lateral meander (Fig. 2), while the other is based on the fluid dynamics and the creation of eddies by the change in flow slope or direction.  These two approaches are connected because the loss of heat from the core of the flow causes a change in the lava rheologic properties. As a column of lava (height h and downstream extent dx) within a flow (of velocity u) encounters a slope break (Fig. 1) or lateral bend (Fig. 2), it pivots about the change in direction, which imparts angular momentum to the lava, and induces circulations (eddies or vortices) in the downstream flow.  The eddies are carried downstream by the main flow and act to disrupt the crusted surface of the flow, thereby exposing the hot flow core.  The eddies (and surface disruption) persist for a time scale dictated by the friction of the eddy rotating against the ambient lava.  Knowing this time scale, and applying a model to determine the velocity u2 and depth h2 of the flow downstream of the slope break, one can derive a distance over which the flow surface experiences disruption. This permits calculation of the enhanced radiative cooling undergone by the flow due to exposure of the hot core over this distance.  The consequences of this enhanced cooling include increasing viscosity, decreasing velocity, flow widening or thickening, and the potential for the flow to stagnate.  With continued effusion from the source, any downstream stagnation points may have observable consequences for flow morphology, including overflowing of channel levees, lava breakouts, or initiation of inflationary activity, which will ultimately influence the areal coverage and total distance travelled by the flow.   Case Study: We have identified a range of lava flow types that are amenable to treatment with our flow models. These flow types represent a diverse range of flow volumes, effusion rates, eruption durau1u 2wcdxqu1qu2mT14wcmT24wcwcmT4    wccore(a)(b)Figure	   2.	   Flow	   geometry	   at	   lateral	   change	   of	   direction.	   (a)	  Oblique	  view	  of	  bend	  in	  lava	  flow:	  eddies	  induced	  by	  the	  bend	  disrupt	   the	   surface	   crust.	   (b)	   Plan	   view	   illustrating	   conse-­quences	   of	   rotation	   of	   the	   channel	   through	   angle	   φ	   at	   the	  bend.	  Figure	  1.	  Geometry	  of	  a	  lava	  flow	  encountering	  a	  slope	  break.	  As	   the	   flow	   pivots	   over	   the	   slope	   break,	   it	   imparts	   angular	  momentum	  to	  eddies	  within	   the	   flow,	   thereby	  disrupting	   the	  surface	  crust,	  exposing	  the	  hot	  flow	  core	  and	  enhancing	  radia-­tive	   heat	   loss	   until	   the	   crust	   reforms	   at	   some	   point	   down-­stream	  for	  some	  distance	  downstream;	  after	  [1].	  2802.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tions, and topographic settings. Here we highlight the case of a long (>200 km) channelized flow in the Tharsis plains [2; Fig. 3] as an example of the application of our analysis. In this instance, the underlying topography is very shallow and does not vary substantially along the length of the flow. However, this flow offers a good example of the effects of flow meandering.  Detailed flow mapping and topographic profiles taken across the flow using MOLA PEDR data reveal complex flow morphologies and relationships with the background terrain (Fig. 3).  The profiles indicate that the flow depth increases from ~27 m upstream of a substantial meander (profiles 8-16; Fig. 3) to ~36 m in the downstream reach (profiles 1-7). The underlying slope and the channel width are approximately constant, such that assuming conservation of volumetric flow rate yields a relationship between the ratio of flow depths h and the ratio of flow viscosities µ upstream (subscript 1) and downstream (subscript 2) of the meander: µ1/µ2 = h1/h2 = 2.34. We contend that this increase in viscosity has to be caused by enhanced cooling of the hot lava flow core as a result of disruption of the surface crust due to interaction with the channel walls as the flow changed direction.  Such a viscosity increase can be related to decreasing temperature using an expression of the form µ1 µ2 ∝ ea(T2−T1 )  [3-6], which implies cooling of the flow core by ~23˚C.  This would be expected to induce significant changes in the flow character and dimensions.   Indeed, downstream of this particular meander (Fig. 3), the flow appears to have stagnated and backed up in the channel to produce the series of overflows (mapped in blue and purple).  Conclusions: This analysis shows that bends in lava channels and topographic breaks in slope do indeed induce recognizable rheological and hence morphological consequences for the flow. Through application of our new flow model, knowledge of the viscosity changes and the dimensions of the flow enable us to make more realistic assessments of volumetric effusion rates, the duration of lava supply, and inferences for flow compositions for these flows, than has been possible with standard flow models. Acknowledgments: This work is supported by NASA MDAP grant NNX14AM31G. References: [1] Glaze L. S. et al. (2014) JGR, 119, doi:10.1002/2013JB010696.  [2] Glaze L. S. et al. (2009), JGR, 114, E07001, doi:10.1029/2008JE00 3278.  [3] Crisp J. and Baloga S. (1990a) Icarus, 85, 512-515. [4] Crisp J. and S. Baloga S. (1990b) JGR, 95, 1255-1270.  [5] Crisp J. and Baloga, S. (1994) JGR, 99(B6), 11,819-11,831. [6] Harris A. J. L. and Rowland S. K. (2001) Bull. Volcanol., 63, 20-44 [7] Rowland S. K. et al. (2004), JGR, 109, doi:10.1029/ 2004JE002288.  meander Figure	   3.	   (a)	   THEMIS	   IR	   mosaic	  showing	   a	   complex	   channelized	  lava	   flow	   in	   the	   Tharsis	   plains	  southwest	   of	   Alba	   Patera	   [2],	   to-­gether	   with	   some	   of	   the	   topo-­graphic	   profiles	   acquired	   for	   this	  flow.	  Changes	   in	   flow	  morphology	  are	  observed	  downstream	  of	   sub-­stantial	   changes	   in	   flow	   direction.	  (b)	   Multiple	   generations	   of	   chan-­nel	   overflows	   are	   mapped	   in	   dif-­ferent	  colors;	  modified	  from	  [2].	  2802.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
