2803.PDF
CROWD-SOURCED SCIENCE USING CITIZEN SCIENCE BUILDER.  P. Gay and C. Lehan, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville (STEM Center).   Introduction:  As technology improves, the quantity of scientific data is growing exponentially. Interpreting, analyzing, and verifying this growing mass of data is becoming increasingly difficult, especially for tasks where methods of employing mathematical analysis or artificial intelligence are unknown. Many complicated problems, such as locating unusual features in images, reading hand-written text, or listening to words spoken with a strong accent, would currently require a human to solve. Frequently, these types of features are identified by scientists, using a valuable human resource, and taking a significant amount of time. With Citizen Science Builder (CSB), we propose a crowdsourced solution using thousands of non-expert citizens to solve the interpretation/identification step in data analysis, resulting in comparable accuracy and reduced time. This process also offers additional benefits, such as education and outreach to the public. Crowd-Sourced Data Analysis: A single lay (non-expert) person is typically significantly less accurate in identifying desired features in data. Fortunately, when a large number of lay persons are used for redundancy (we are confident using 15), accuracy and consistency increase dramatically. Using our software, the CosmoQuest Moon Mappers project achieved an accuracy within 10% of the combined results of several scientists. Users range from children to elders from all varieties of backgrounds and countries. Ease of Use: For CosmoQuest, the most time consuming portion of creating a new CSB project is uploading the data to file servers. Ignoring data uploads, a new project can be created in less than an hour. The interface for users is simple enough that mastery takes only a few minutes, with tools for marking a large variety of objects that a science team may require. Results can be viewed and extracted from the database with built-in tools, and a variety of data analysis tools are available to see trends or broad information. Development is leaning strongly toward a more open source framework, where science teams can use CSB on their own servers with minimal effort.  References: [1] Robbins S. et al. (2014) Icarus, 234, 109.  2803.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
