2806.PDF
SURFACE AND SECTION GEOLOGY OF NON-CRATER BASIN STRATA EXPOSED IN CENTRAL HADRIACUS CAVI, MARS.  J. A. Skinner, Jr.1, C. M. Fortezzo1, and M. L. Barton1,2, 1Astrogeology Science Center, U. S. Geological Survey, 2255 N. Gemini Dr., Flagstaff, AZ 86001 (jskinner@usgs.gov), School of Earth Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011.   Introduction:  Stratified units that outcrop across Mars provide critical information about geologic processes related to the evolution of sedimentary basins, potentially including details about interactions between tectonism, depositional environments, and paleoclimate [1,2]. Basin studies on Mars rely heavily on regional observations to help establish hypotheses of basin formation, which can then be tested through localized (large-scale) geological mapping using highresolution data. Because of the areal extent and geologic diversity of adjacent watersheds compared to impact crater basins, strata exposed in inter-crater basins on Mars have particularly high potential for yielding important, as-yet-unexplored details about interacting geologic processes for through-going depositional systems. Here, we present the surface and section characteristics of stratified deposits exposed in central Hadriacus Cavi (78.0°E, -27.3°N) based on 1:24,000 scale geologic mapping and stratigraphic analyses. Regional Setting:  Hadriacus Cavi is a 65 km long, 15 km wide set of irregularly-shaped, east-west oriented depressions located in the cratered highland of southwest Tyrrhena Terra, along the northeastern rim of the Hellas basin. The cavi are bound on the south by topographic promontories interpreted as Hellas-related crustal massifs [2] and on the north by Hadriacus Palus, a nearly horizontal plain interpreted as erosional detritus related (in part) to fluvial activity in adjacent Napo and Huallaga Valles. Global geologic mapping suggests the Hadraicus Cavi strata are Late Noachian in age and were deposited on Early to Middle Noachian units comprising the highland plateau sequence [2]. Model absolute age determinations [3] generally support global assessments [2], showing that the surrounding highland plains have a primary age of 4.1±0.1 Ga and a resurfacing age of 3.4±0.2 Ga, the latter of which corresponds to the age of the age of the Hadriacus Plaus surface (3.4±0.1 Ga). Small area counts within the cavi yield ages of 3.8±0.2 Ga [3], suggesting the basin-related deposits were accumulating during the Middle Noachian.  Our mapping focuses on a >500 meters-thick section of strata exposed in central Hadriacus Cavi that extends southward from the surface of Hadriacus Palus. The cavi walls and mesas are made up of multiple, meters-thick light-and dark-toned layers that are laterally continuous, where dark-toned layers form slopes and light-toned layers form benches and cliffs.  Figure 1. HiRISE examples of mapped unit groups. North to top. (A) Breccia group. (B) Dark-toned group. (C) Pockmarked group. (D) Columnar group. (E) Channeled group. (F) Layered group. (G) Westlooking perspective cavi strata showing slight (<5°) northward dip of the "level zero" marker bed (white arrow) and surrounding strata. The black arrow identifies southward dipping beds of the dark-toned group. Mid-field view is ~ 1.5 km across. 2806.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Datasets and Methods:  Our mapping, descriptions, and analyses were based primarily on a SOCET Set-derived [4] digital terrain model (DTM) (clon=78.04°E, 1.5 m/px) and associated orthoimages (0.5 m/px) using HiRISE stereo-pairs ESP_031924_1525 and ESP_032069_1525. Base data were supplemented by HiRISE gray-scale images (registered to DTM-derived orthoimages) to assist with unit identification and description and CTX image mosaics, HRSC mosaics and DTMs, and THEMIS daytime IR mosaics to assist with linking local observations to surrounding terrains. Data were displayed and mapping completed in Esri's ArcGIS software, assisted by 3-dimensional rendering in ArcScene. We keyed off a single stratigraphic unit ("level zero") that is traceable throughout the study region (and adjacent areas in Hadriacus Cavi), which provided a relative marker bed for identifying and interpreting the local geologic section. Results: We identify six groups of stratified units in central Hadriacus Cavi. We emphasize that we do not regard theses groups as discrete geologic units or members (at least not yet), but rather groups of strata that collectively display similar internal morphologies, lateral occurrences, and tonal variation. Breccia group. This is stratigraphically the  lowest group exposed in the study area. The breccia group displays weak internal stratification and is characterized by irregularly-shaped, light-toned, interlocked blocks separated by dark material (Fig. 1A). Blocks range from the limit of image resolution (~1 m) to ~10 m in diameter. The group contain a few narrow  (<1 m wide) lineaments that trend north-south across outcrops as well as a few circular to ovoidal landforms. The unit group is at least 20 m thick, though the lower boundary is not observed in the study region. Dark-toned group. This group overlies the breccia group and is characterized by subtle, meter-scale, darktoned layers, a few which may form benches and platforms within the local chasmata (Fig. 1B). The uppermost surface of the lower dark group characeteristically contain channel-like sinuous depresions that form topographic platforms [5]. This group is covered in many places by surficial units, which limits identification of geologic contacts both within and around the group. The dark-toned group is ~250 m thick. Pockmarked group. This group is characterized by laterally-continuous, meter-scale light- and dark-toned beds, some of which are composed of meter-scale blocks (Fig. 1C). The uppermost surface of this group contains quasi-circular topographic hollows ranging from a few to tens of meters in diameter, which provides a pockmarked and hummocky surface appearance. The pockmarked group is between 10 and 20 m thick. Columnar group. This group is comprised entirely of intermediate- to light-toned strata that display columns where outcropping in vertical sections of the canyon walls (Fig. 1D). In plan-view, these columns appear as meter-scale polygons. In some places, up to three distinct layers of columns are apparent. The unit group is ~25 m thick. Channeled group. This group is characterized by repeated, regular sequences of light- and dark-toned layers. Interspersed within these laterally-traceable, rythmmic sequences are asymmetric, light-toned lensshaped landforms that display no internal stratification (Fig. 1E). Rather, these light-toned lenses appear to incise and abut adjacent strata. Lenses are between 13 and 184 m wide and 2 and 10 m deep (see [5] for further descriptions]. The channeled group is ~25 m thick. Layered group. This group is characterized by repeated, regular sequences of light- and dark-toned layers that are each meters to a fews meters thick. This group is similar in appearance to the underlying channeled group, though without the occurrence of channel-like cross-sectional lenses. Within this group is the "level zero" marker bed (Fig. 1F-G), which serves as widely-occuring local referent unit for superposing and subjacent units and groups. This group is ~80 m thick. Intepretations: Geological mapping and stratgraphic analyses are helping to decipher the complex geologic history of the strata exposed in central Hadriacus Cavi. We interpret the currently mapped groups as follows: (1) basal breccias, perhaps formed as fragmented target rock related to Hellas or post-Hellas impact cratering events and/or erosion of uplifted crustal massifs, (2) dark-toned stratified units resulting from deposition of fine-grained sediments, perhaps impact-related commuinution and/or volcanic ash, (3) columnar-jointed volcanic units, perhaps lava flows or welded tuffs (or both) related to volcanism resulting from Hellas-related crustal thinning, (4) fluvial deposits within or above volcanic units, and (5) multiple sequences of undifferentiated strata, possibily related to aeolian, fluvial, volcanic, and impact-related proceses. References: [1] Grotzinger, J. P. and Milliken, R. E. (2012) SEPM Sp. Pub. 102, p. 1-48. [2] Tanaka, K. L. et al. (2014) USGS SIM 3292, 1:15M scale. [3] Fortezzo, C. M. and Skinner, J. A., Jr. (2013), LPS XLIV, Abstract #2104. [4] Kirk R.L. et al. (2009) LPS XL, Abstract #1414. [5] Barton, M. L. et al. (this volume). Acknowledgements:  This work was upported by NASA's Planeatary Geology and Geophysis Program under award No. NNH1AU831. 2806.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
