 Estimating Oxygen Flux Into Subglacial Lake Vostok, Antarctica, Using The Relationship Between Temperature and Englacial Radar Attenuation.  P. Kintner1,2, D. P. Winebrenner1,2, M. Koutnik1, K. Matsuoka1,3, J. A. MacGregor4. 1University of Washington Earth and Space Science Department (kintner@uw.edu), 2University of Washington Applied Physics Laboratory, 3Norwegian Polar Institute, 4Institute for Geophysics, The University of Texas at Austin.   Introduction:   Ice-covered seas have been observed throughout the solar system and are compelling environments for life not only because of the presence of liquid water but also due to the possibility of chemical energy sources. On Earth, over 300 subglacial lakes [1] lie beneath the Antarctic Ice Sheet, of which Lake Vostok is the largest. These lakes are of direct importance to astrobiology because of their similarities to ice-covered seas in the outer solar system, such as on Europa [2].  Understanding and quantifying the available chemical energy for metabolism helps to ascess the habitablitiy of extreme environments. This is difficult for icecovered seas in the outer solar system, but Antarctic subglacial lakes offer numerous analogous and accessible environments. Energy availability in Lake Vostok depends on many specific environmental inputs. Chemical inputs into the lake come from sediments in the lakebed, flow of subglacial water into the lake from the Lake Vostok drainage basin, and the melting of iceenclathrated air from the bottom of the ice sheet.  Chemoautotrophic microorganisms likely reside in Lake Vostok [3]. Many microorganisms operate with an anaerobic metabolism, however the presence of oxygen greatly increase the amount of available chemical energy. Aerobic metabolisms may be necessary for the existence of complex life [4]. Understanding the availability of chemical energy from the concentration of oxygen in the lake is then important to understanding the possible prevelaince of complex life in Lake Vostok, which has implications for complex life in an Europan ocean. Here we aim to constrain the oxygen input from melting of the bottom of the ice sheet. Considerable amounts of radar-sounding data have already been collected over Lake Vostok, which could be used to further constrain the oxygen flux at the icelake interface there. Since radio-wave energy is absorbed by ice at a rate that depends predominately on temperature [5], the englacial attenuation of radio waves can be used as a proxy for englacial temperature. Hence, the distribution of melting and freezing over the entire lake-ice interface (the "lake lid") can be constrained and related to the oxygen flux into Lake Vostok.  Methods:   Freeze-on and melt rates at the bed of the ice sheet generate vertical advection and a heat source or sink at the lake lid. As such, smaller basal temperature gradients are associated with freezing conditions and larger gradients under melting conditions. Freezing ice is warmer and will attenuate radio waves at a greater rate.  A 1-D steady-state temperature model is constructed in the style of Robin [6] that also accounts for the melting and freezing of ice at the lake lid. This model was fitted to the Lake Vostok borehole-temperature profile using the freeze-on rates reported by Bell et al. [7] and adjusting the millennial-scale surface accumulation rate accordingly. We use 60-MHz airborne radar data grid over Lake Vostok collected by the The University of Texas at Austin's Institute for Geophysics to constrain the englacial radar-attenuation rate. To calculate this attenuation, we correct for spherical spreading, transmission loss at the surface, the lake-lid reflectivity, and refractive gain in firn. We assume that the englacial chemistry is uniform over the Lake Vostok region for the calculation of attenuation.  Results:   MacGregor et al. [8] estimated depthaveraged attenuation rates along the flowline through the core site. Using the 1-D temperature model and attenuation dependence on the temperature, we estimated basal mass balance (Fig. 1).  Figure 1. Depth-averaged radar-attenuation rate and inferred freeze-on rate at the lake lid along a flowline that passes through the Vostok ice core. The grayed areas are over Lake Vostok, and freeze-on rates are calculated only for the lake lid.    The freeze-on rates start initially very high in the embayment of Lake Vostok. This is likely the result of ice starting the traverse colder than the freezing point. The trend in Figure 1 suggests that as the ice traverses the lake it initially warms up, but then slowly cools over the traverse. The upturn in the attenuation rate and  freezing rate at the end of the lake may be due to strain heating of ice as it transistions to flowing over the bedrock.  We observe only freezing conditions along the flowline, which passes through the southern section of Lake Vostok. This cooroborates the trend for mass balance seen in Filina et al. [9], where the southern section of the lake is accreating ice and the northern section is melting the ice sheet.  Discussion:   Issues still exist in determining attenuation from the collected radar data. It will be done using three near surface radar reflectors in the ice sheet that are continuous over the Lake Vostok region described in MacGregor et al. [10]. The depth-averaged attenuation rate can be found by comparing the power from the reflectors with the lake lid reflection. From the depth-averaged attenuation the freezing and melting rate can be determined using a 1-D steady state temperature model for the ice sheet. While issues remain in the determining attenuation from we seek first to determine the validity of the 1-D steady state temperature model for englacial temperatures. While the Antarctic ice sheet moves relatively slowly in the Lake Vostok area the ten thousand year time scale for ice to traverse Lake Vostok is relevant to the vertical advection of ice. Furthermore over these time scales climatic temperature changes and varying surface accumulation rates can leave lasting changes in the temperature profile. These changes may lead to deviations from a steady state as was assumed. The 1-D model also ignores the horizontal spreading of the ice sheet that is apparent over Lake Vostok. Future Work:   To understand the validity of the 1-D steady state model over Lake Vostok we will use the thermomechanical flow-band model based off of Price et al. [11] and Koutnik and Waddington [12] for comparison. The flow-band model discussed here solves the adective-diffusive heat equation and momentum equations using the shallow ice approximation to understand the movement and temperature evolution of the ice sheet. These equations are discretized using the finite volume method.  The model will be forced with varying accumlation rates and surface temperatures for multiple flowbands across Lake Vostok. The model will be run from 80 ka, to the present. This is about four times the time it takes ice to traverse the lake, giving the model time to remove effects of the intitial conditions in the final result. Firstly the model will reproduce the measured Vostok borehole temperature profile. Then the results of the flowband model will be compared to the 1-D model based upon the measured temperature profile.  As the ice sheet is not truly in steady state we use a thermomechanical flow band model to understand deviations from steady state due to horizontal ice advection and past climate forcings. The flow band model can be used to determine where the temperature profile is not largely affected by basal melting and freezing of the ice sheet. In these areas the 1-D model may not be applicable. They most likely occur around the border of Lake Vostok. Where the ice sheet first flows over the lake the ice is initially colder than the pressure melting point and may take time to warm up to the point where freeze on effects the temperature profile. Where the ice sheet flows away from the lake complicated strain patterns can heat the ice internally.  The surface accumulation rate is used as a free parameter in the 1-D steady state model to fit the model to the measured profile at the Vostok ice core site. The final state of the flowband model can serve the purpose of the measured profile over the entire lake. The 1-D model can be fit to the flowband model over the entire lake using the surface accumulation rate as a free parameter. This will create a map of an adjusted spatially varying surface accumulation rate. Then the 1-D model can be used to quickly and easily find the melting and freezing rates, and thus oxygen input, of the ice sheet over Lake Vostok from the englacial depth-averaged attenuation rate.   References: [1] Wright & Siegert, (2012) Antarctic Sci. 24 (06): 659-664. [2] Kivelson et al. (2000) Science 289 (5483): 1340-1343. [3] Shtarkman et al. (2013) PLoS ONE 8 (7): e67221 [4] Catling et al. (2005) Astrobiology 5(3): 415-38.  [5] MacGregor et al. (2007) J. Geophys. Res 112 (F3) [6] Robin (1955) J. Glac. 2 (18): 523-532. [7] Bell et al. (2002) Nature 416 (6878): 307-310. [8] MacGregor et al. (2012) J. Geophys. Res 117 (F3). [9] Filina et al. (2008)  Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 276: 106-114. [10] MacGregor et al. (2009) Ann Glaciol. 50 (51):25-34. [11] Price et al. (2007) J. Geophys. Res. 112. [12] Koutnik and Waddington (2012) J. Glac. 58(211):1008-1020.   