 MELTING CONDITIONS OF ALKALI- AND PHOSPHORUS-RICH PRIMARY MAGMAS FROM THE MARTIAN MANTLE.  M. Collinet and T. L. Grove, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA, 02139.   Introduction: Primary basaltic magmas (i.e. melts in equilibrium with the mantle) are key to probe the chemistry of planetary interiors, understand the conditions of magmatic differentiation and constrain the dynamic processes of mantle melting. Recognizing primary melts involves finding rocks with olivine and/or pyroxene phenocrysts with Mg# ~90 for the Earth and >75 for Mars [1,2]. For rocks analyzed in situ by rovers, the whole-rock composition is the only fully quantitative information available. In such cases, a wholerock Mg# of >50 is often considered as a potential liquid in equilibrium with the Martian mantle. Additional tests are required to determine if the rock crystallized in a closed system or if it contains cumulate crystals or xenocrysts (e.g. [3]). Inverse experimental studies are frequently conducted to locate the position of multiple saturation points (MSPs) in pressure-temperature space [e.g. 4, 5]. If olivine and orthopyroxene are found at the MSP, the melt is inferred to be near-primary and the pressure-temperature (P-T) conditions of the MSP are interpreted as the melting conditions of the source.   Here we show that, while this interpretation is relevant in many cases [6], it is only valid for liquids produced by more than 10-15 wt.% of mantle melting. Due to the incongruent nature of the melting reactions, low-degree (alkali rich) primary magmas have no olivine - orthopyroxene (ol-opx) or olivine - orthopyroxene - clinopyroxene (ol-opx-cpx) MSP. The melting conditions of these low-degree melts cannot be retrieved by an inverse experimental approach and direct melting experiments are necessary. An important element in Martian melts is phosphorus. It is 10 times more abundant in the Martian mantle than in the Earth's mantle [1] and is concentrated with alkalis in low-degree Martian primary magmas.  We have extended the recent experimental study that characterized the melting behavior of a nominally anhydrous Martian mantle from 0.5 to 2.2 GPa [7] by directly melting a martian peridotite [1]. The additional experiments further constrain the melting reactions at low temperature, confirm that the compositions reported in [7] are in equilibrium, and explore the effect of variable amounts of phosphorus on the melting conditions of low-degree melts. Experimental methods: We performed two types of experiments - inverse and liquid-peridotite experiments - from two previous experimental melts obtained by directly melting a Martian mantle composition [7]. Experiments were performed with pistoncylinder apparatus in Pt-graphite capsules following the method described in [7].  The composition of the multiply saturated liquid in experiment DW01 (1250 °C - 1.0 GPa) [7] and D268 (1380 °C - 2.6 GPa) were used as starting materials. Inverse experiments were performed to test if the liquid compositions in DW01 and D268 would be saturated with a peridotitic assembly at the same P-T conditions as the direct melting experiments. Liquid-peridotite experiments consist of placing a mix of 50 to 33 % of the liquid composition (from DW01 and D268) and 50 to 67 % of the mantle composition [1] at the same P-T conditions to verify if the direct melting experiments reached equilibrium. Variable amounts of phosphorus were added to the starting compositions as phosphoric acid before drying the powder at 300 °C for 12 h. Detailed experimental conditions are reported in Table 1.  Table 1. Summary of pressure (GPa) - temperature (°C) conditions, proportion of mantle composition (DW, [1]) to liquid composition from direct melting experiments (DW01 [7] and D268) in liquid-peridotite experiments, P2O5 content of the liquids (wt.%) and mineral assembly.  Results: The phases in equilibrium with the liquid in each experiment are reported in Table 1. For inverse experiments, clinopyroxene alone is in equilibrium with the liquid at 1.0 GPa while olivine and clinopyroxene are present at 2.6 GPa.  This differs from the phases present in direct melting and liquid-peridotite experiments: ol-opx-cpx. The compositions of inverse and liquid-peridotite experiments overlap the trends  defined by direct melting experiments in variation diagrams (Figure 1). The new experimental melts with higher contents of phosphorus also have lower SiO2 concentration (Figure 1) and higher CaO/Al2O3 ratios (by ~0.1).   Melts at equilibrium: Liquid-peridotite experiments at 1.0 GPa confirm that the melts reported in [7] reached conditions close to thermodynamic equilibrium with the Martian mantle. The melts in liquid-peridotite experiments are in equilibrium with the same mineral phases (Table 1) and have almost identical chemical compositions (Figure 1, circled in grey). Incongruent melting and MSP: Inverse experiments confirm the incongruent nature of melting reactions [7]. At 1.0 GPa, the orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene and spinel react to produce a liquid, olivine and another clinopyroxene poorer in Ca. The bulk proportion of clinopyroxene first increases as melting progresses. At higher temperature, the reaction becomes clinopyroxene + spinel  orthopyroxene + liquid (+ olivine), and clinopyroxene disappears rapidly. Olivine is present but is marginally involved in the reaction. Experiment DW01 represents the transition between those two regimes. When the liquid is isolated from its residue in inverse experiments, it crystallizes only the phases on the left hand side (LHS) of the equation (mainly clinopyroxene). At 2.6 GPa, the melting reaction that produces the melt in experiment D268 is clinopyroxene + olivine + spinel  orthopyroxene + liquid. At this pressure too, only the phases on the LHS of the equation are present in inverse experiments. Olivine and/or orthopyroxene can be absent from inverse experiments of low-degree primary melts.  The major implication is that natural alkali rich basalts could lack ol-opx-cpx or ol-opx MSPs despite being near-primary. In addition, the presence of an olcpx MSP could point towards lower P-T conditions relative to the actual conditions of melting. The MSP found in inverse experimental studies should be interpreted carefully for potential low-degree melts. Effect of phosphorus on melt compositions: Phosphorus has been argued to significantly modify the structure, composition and crystallization paths of silicate melts [8]. In particular, phosphorus was suggested to decrease the silica activity and increase the CaO/Al2O3 ratios in martian environments [9]. Our preliminary calculations did not reveal a significant effect of phosphorus on SiO2 activity. The effect of phosphorus observed in Figure 1 (top) could be an increase in the silica activity coefficient or a decrease in the MgO activity coefficient (resulting in a decrease in SiO2 and an increase in MgO concentrations). We also observe a slight increase (~0.1-0.15) of the CaO/Al2O3 ratio for an increase of phosphorus in the liquid by 2-3 wt.%. Overall, the impact of phosphorus on Martian melts seems to be an order of magnitude less important than anticipated from pMELTS calculations [9]. References: [1] Dreibus G. and Wänke H. (1985) Meteoritics, 20, 267-381. [2] Taylor G. J. et al. (2013) Chemie der Erde, 73, 401-4250, [3] Filiberto J. and Dasgupta R. (2011) EPSL, 304, 527-537. [4] Monders A. G. et al. (2006) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 42, 131-148. [5] Filiberto J. et al. (2008) Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 43, 1137-1146. [6] Asimow P. D. and Longhi J. (2004) J. Pet., 45, 2349-2367. [7] Collinet M. et al. (2015). EPSL, 427, 83-94. [8] Toplis M. J. et al. (1994) Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 117, 293-304. [9] Toplis M. J. et al., (2008) LPS XXXIX, Abstract #1282.   Figure 1. Variation diagram comparing direct melting experiments at different pressures to inverse and liquidperidotite experiments at 1.0 and 2.6 GPa. The starting material is the Martian mantle [1] for direct melting experiments, the green circle/diamond for inverse experiments and both for liquid-peridotite experiments. In the top figure, the phosphorus content of melts is reported for the starting compositions (DW 01 and D268 melts) and liquid-peridotite experiments.  