2854.PDF
FRACTAL GROWTH AND RADIAL MIGRATION OF SOLIDS: THE ROLE OF POROSITY AND COMPACTION INAN EVOLVING NEBULA. P. R. Estrada1 and J. N. Cuzzi2, 1 Carl Sagan Center, SETI Institute, Mountain View CA 94043, USA,(Paul.R.Estrada@nasa.gov), 2 NASA Ames Research Center, MS 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94043, USA..Introduction: The manner in which solids in the primordialnebula can proceed from sub-micron dust to larger bodies remains problematic due to the various barriers to growth grainsmay encounter. These include the bouncing (e.g., [1]), andfragmentation barriers (e.g., [2-4]) which, depending on nebulaproperties can nearly grind the process of incremental growthto a halt long before planetesimal sizes can be achieved. Moreover, a rather detrimental effect of the slowed growth rate ofsolid particles is that they cannot hope to overcome the radialdrift barrier (often referred to as the "meter-sized" barrier) asthey radially drift faster than they can grow (e.g., [5-6]).One can bypass these issues by simply assuming that thenebula was not turbulent. Indeed, non turbulent nebulae canwork under certain conditions [7]. But, this simple-mindedview is inconsistent with observations such as, e.g., the formation ages of primitive meteorites [8-9], and the duration (andevolution) of "dusty-gas" protoplanetary nebulae [10]. Thusthe evidence for mixing at least in the early nebular environment argues for some form of angular momentum transport.The most viable turbulence mechanism up until now remainsMRI, but it cannot operate over large radial expanses of thedisk (e.g., [11]). However, new mechanisms have been proposed that may operate under the right conditions ([12-13], seeUmurhan et al., this conference).Global models for solids evolution under moderately turbulent conditions were explored by [6] who found that growthto larger sizes (∼ mm-cm-sized) in signiﬁcant numbers is difﬁcult, posing a problem for "leap frog" methods such as thestreaming instability (SI, e.g., [14]) and turbulent concentration (TC, e.g., [15]) which require locally large solids-to-gasratios (see Cuzzi et al., this conference). Here we considerthat outside the snow line, icy particles are not only "stickier"than non-icy particles (reﬂected in larger strengths Q∗), butalso growth, at least initially, is fractal where particles becomequite porous and their radial drift velocities remain low (consistent with, e.g., [16]) because their Stokes numbers St remainlow, allowing them to overcome the radial drift barrier. However, we expect that compaction will play a role increasingtheir drift rates. Here we explore models with fractal growthand an up-to-date compaction model [17] in order to assess thepossible pathways to larger sizes, perhaps even planetesimals.Brief Global Model Description: We employ a 1+1D globalgas and solids evolution code that we have developed thatsimultaneously treats self-consistently the growth and radialdrift of material of all sizes, accounts for vertical diffusionand settling of small grains, radial diffusion of dust and vaporphases of multiple species, and incorporates a self-consistentcalculation of opacity and disk temperature which allows us totrack the evaporation and condensation of various species attheir respective evaporation fronts (EFs) as they are transportedthroughout the disk [6].Results Assuming Solid Particle Growth: In Figure 1, weshow a simulation of the protoplanetary disk over 2×105 yearswhich includes the a full range of collisional dynamics (seeFigure 1: Model for solid particle growth that includes bouncing,fragmentation and mass transfer. Upper panel: Fragmentation radiusr∗ (dashed), particle radius that carries most of the mass rM (solidblack) and largest particle radius rL (solid black curve). The Stokesnumbers for rM and rL are shown in blue. Also plotted are the meanparticle densities (red). lower panel: Fractional masses shown at twodifferent times. From [6].[6]), with an initial disk mass of 0.2M⊙ (M⊙ is a solar mass),forαt = 5×10−4. The particle strengthsQ∗, whichdeterminethe fragmentation size r∗, are compositionally dependent. Themodel includes several species in cosmic abundance, all ofwhich are solid outside the water-ice EF located between ∼4− 7 AU. In the top panel, black curves depict particles sizesof interest (see caption). Inside the water ice EF, rL ≫ rM ,but these largest particles are few in number and are considered"lucky particles" arising from incremental growth (a PDF incollisional velocities is used to determine their destructionprobabilities). The relatively constant St (blue) in the outerdisk and the shape of the rL curve is indicative of particlesnot overcoming the radial drift barrier (see [6]). In the bottompanel are plotted the fractional masses at two different times.The key point here is that radial drift depletes the outerdisk rather quickly, and enhances the inner nebula by as muchas a factor of ∼ 5 over the initial value. Longer simulationscontinue this trend, while the inner disk enhancements do notincrease much further for this moderate value of αt.Simple Prescription for Fractal Growth: For a fractal dimension D, the growth of particles by low velocity collisionsof monomers of mass m0 and radius r0 can be described bym = m0(r/r0)D, r = r0(m/m0)1/D, where D = 3 refersto the usual solid particle growth. For D < 3, the particledensity decreases with radius and their porosities φ increasesuch that ρp/ρ0 = 1 − φ = ψ−1, where ψ is the ﬁlling factor, and the monomer density ρ0 = 3m0/4pir30 . For r > r∗,we implement a crude compaction such that ψ = ψ∗ remains2854.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
FRACTAL GROWTH, POROSITY AND COMPACTION, P. R. Estrada and J. N. CuzziFigure 2: Complementary model to that shown in Fig. 1 for fractal growth. Description for the various curves are the same. Fractalgrowth leads to porous particles whose St in the outer disk are considerably lower. Their reduced drift rates thus allow them to overcomethe radial drift barrier and much larger aggregate sizes are reached.Figure 3: Plot of the mean fractal dimensionD and maximum ﬁllingfactor ψ for the simulation shown in Fig. 2 (cyan), as well as a casewhere the turbulence is an order of magnitude stronger (red). Only acrude compaction scheme is implemented (see text). Outside the snowline, as the region becomes rich in water, the stickiness of particlesincreases asD decreases.constant, and r = r0(ψ∗m/m0)1/3. Note that the particlestopping times ts ∝ m2/D0m1−2/D . Thus in the extreme caseof D = 2, aggregates drift at the same rate as a monomer.Results Assuming Fractal Growth: In Figure 2, we showthe complementary case in which we have included fractalgrowth as described above. The main points to take here isthat outside the snowline, particles can grow to much largersizes (∼ 50 m outside the water ice EF) and in a much shortertime scale. Furthermore, the slow radial drift of solids allowsthe outer disk to retain its material. Thus, in the solid particlegrowth case (D = 3), the dust disk has become depletedsigniﬁcantly whereas with porous particles, the solids fractionremains similar to the initial value over the same time scale. Asa consequence, however, the enhancements in the inner diskare muted because much less material has been transportedthere due to drift. This effect is further illustrated in Figure 3where we show the D and ψ as a function of semi major axis(red curves) for the model in Fig. 2. As solids are evaporatedat the EF and diffuse outwards, they condense outside the frontmaking the particles icier there, and a feedback effect ensuesdecreasing D and increasing particle aggregate sizes.This results suggests that progressively larger aggregatescan be produced, especially just outside the snow line, whilepreventing the rapid loss of material to the inner disk. However, this may make it even more difﬁcult to produce the largeenhancements required (solids-to-gas ratio near unity), e.g., tosatisfy the SI, unless a another mechanism is at work that is efﬁcient at removing the gas. Whether radial drift of material isimportant or not has broad implications. For example, if radialdrift is not important, one would predict a core for Jupiter (assuming it formed near the snow line) that is not very enrichedin water relative to cosmic, whereas if drift is important, thenJupiter's core should be very much enhanced in water.Recipe for Compaction: Our simulation above does not include realistic compaction. Collisional compaction can beginto occur when the collisional energyE & Eroll whereEroll isthe energy needed to roll two monomers over an angle of 90o[18]. Aggregates can also only withstand some external pressure before being compressed from the surrounding gas andself-gravity. For this talk, we will implement a more realisticmodel based on [17,19] that treat these compression effects.Discussion: Our simpliﬁed fractal growth and compactionmodel in Figs. 2 and 3 demonstrates that fractal growth couldplay a very important role in allowing particle growth to overcome the radial drift barrier. We expect that implementing themore sophisticated compaction scheme above will provide usa more realistic constraint on particle growth, though we acknowledge that more experimental studies are required under,e.g., different circumstances of grain size, and mixed composition to better understand the compaction process. We willpresent simulations that incorporate these new physics, andwill run longer duration nebula evolutions to see how the conditions within the disk change over time. Continued stalledgrowth might then argue for mechanisms that systematicallyremove gas from the disk.This work was originally supported by a grant from the OSSprogram.References [1] Windmark et al., 2012a. A&A 540, A73. [2] Dullemond and Dominik, 2005. A&A 434, 971. [3] Johansen et al., 2016.In Asteroids IV, arXiv:1505.02941. [4] Dominik et al., 2007. InP&P V, 783. [5] Birnsteil et al., 2010. A&A 513, A79. [6] Estradaet al., 2016. Accepted to ApJ. [7] Weidenschilling, J., 2011. Icarus214, 671. [8] Wadhwa and Russell, 2000. In P&P IV, 995. [9] Kitaet al., 2005. ASP conf. ser., 341, 558. [10] Williams, 2012. Meteor.Plan. Sci. 34, 1915. [11] Turner et al., 2007. ApJ 659, 729. [12]Nelson et al., 2013. MNRAS 435, 2610. [13] Marcus et al., 2015.ApJ 808, id. 87. [14] Youdin and Goodman, 2005. ApJ 620, 459.[15] Cuzzi et al., 2008. ApJ 687, 1432. [16] Okuzumi et al., 2012.ApJ 106, 18pp. [17] Krijt et al., 2015. A&A 574, id.A83. [18]Dominik and Tielens, 1997. ApJ 480, 647. [19] Ormel et al.,2007. A&A 461, 215.2854.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
