2864.PDF
THE NEUTRAL ATMOSPHERES OF PLUTO AND CHARON. M. E. Summers1, G. R. Gladstone2,3, S. A. Stern4, K. Ennico5, C. B. Olkin4, H. A. Weaver5, L. A. Young4, D. F. Strobel7,  D. P. Hinson8, J. A. Kammer4, A. H. Parker4, A. J. Steffl4, I. R. Linscott6, J. Wm. Parker4, A. F. Cheng7, C. M. Lisse7, M. H. Versteeg2, T. K. Greathouse2, K. D. Retherford2,3, W. W. Woods6, K. N. Singer4, C. C. C. Tsang4, E.  Schindhelm4, M. L. Wong8, Y. L. Yung8, X. Zhu7, P. Lavvas9, M. Ewell1, A. D. Jacobs1, and G. L. Tyler6, and the New Horizons Atmospheres Team. 1George Mason University, Fairfax, VA 22030, msummers@gmu.edu, 2Southwest Research Institute, San Antonio, TX 78238, 3The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78238, 4Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO 80302, 5National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Ames Research Center, Space Science Division, Moffett Field, CA 94035, 6Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 7The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, 8California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 9Groupe de Spectroscopie Moléculaire et Atmosphérique, Université Reims Champagne-Ardenne, 51687 Reims, France.  Introduction: The New Horizons flyby of Pluto has given us the first close view of its surface and neutral atmosphere. The flyby observations revealed a surprisingly complex atmosphere, with a completely unexpected radial temperature (and thus density) structure, as well as numerous haze layers in the region of the atmosphere where they were least expected [1].  These observations have allow us to develop a picture (albeit tentative) of the processes which control the atmosphere's overall structure and composition.  The New Horizons observations have also given us some intriguing hints as to how the atmosphere may evolve on seasonal and perhaps much longer timescales.  The complement of instruments on the New Horizons spacecraft included 1) a radio science experiment (REX) which provided near-surface pressure and temperature profiles and ionospheric detection cabability, 2) an ultraviolet spectrograph (Alice) that gave information on atmospheric composition, temperature and hazes, and 3) imagers (LORRI and MVIC) that provided images of Pluto's haze layers at a range of phase angles, as well as of surface volatiles. Plasma instruments aboard New Horizons yielded other information not discussed here. Pluto's Atmosphere: The REX instrument directly measured Pluto's surface pressure at the ingress and egress points during the Earth-spacecraft radio occultation of Pluto's atmosphere.  The ingress and egress surface pressure determinations were consistent at ~10 microbar, and revealed a strong temperature inversion in the lower scale height of the atmosphere, consistent with atmospheric temperature profiles retrieved from prior Earth-based stellar occultation measurements.  The Alice experiment observed nitrogen opacity in solar occultation to altitudes near ~1300 km, with again virtually symmetric profiles for ingress/egress.  The nitrogen opacity at high altitudes was much lower than pre-encounter expectations, implying a much colder, and thus more compact upper atmosphere [2].  The lower termperatures argue for an additional cooling agent in thermodynamic models, perhaps HCN (recently detected by ALMA observations [3]).  The colder upper atmosphere means that escape occurs via thermal Jeans evaporation rather than the hydrodynamic outflow mechanism that was widely predicted before encounter.  Inferred escape rates based upon modeling the more compact atmosphere are two to three orders of magnitude lower than pre-encounter predictions. The Alice solar occultation also revealed absorption by methane at high altitudes, consistent with a methane near-surface mixing ratio of ~0.008. But methane appears to be the dominant constituent near the exobase.  Acetylene and ethylene were observed with mixing ratios in the range 1 - 4 x 10-4 between 250 and 600 km altitude. These values imply weak vertical eddy mixing in the atmosphere, with a turbosphere confined to the below 200 km altitude. A global atmospheric haze was observed to extend to altitudes at least 200 km, with at least 20 individual imbedded, thin (~3-5 km, or less), layers as illustrated in Figure 1.   A lower atmospheric haze was expected from prior stellar occultations, but had been inferred to exist in only in the lowest 20 km where photochemical products such as hydrocarbons and nitriles would condense at the low temperatures in this region of the atmosphere.  The lowest of the observed haze layers (~610 km altitude) extends horizontally over more than a thousand kilometers. This lowest layer may be the predicted photochemical haze.   Figure 1. Image of Pluto's limb, showing solar backlit haze with thin embedded layers.      Pluto's haze may be analogous to Titan's detached haze layer [4], which occurs at roughly the same pres2864.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
sure level at Pluto's.  The formation of Titan's haze is thought to be initiated by nucleation via electronattachment to hydrocarbons at ionospheric heights producing extended tholin chains.  Sedimentation of these small nuclei is accompanied initially by diffusional growth, and later by growth due to coagulation. Our new ionospheric calculations (incorporationg the colder and more compact upper atmosphere) show that the ionosphere peak is  ~700-900 km altitude, significantly above the observed haze. Diffusional growth as the particles fall will lead to near-spherical nuclei at high altitudes above 200 km. But upon falling through the haze layer, growth by coagulation may lead to more complex structures and perhaps fractals. As the fractal particles fall through the lowest photochemical haze layer, the particles may add a coating of hydrocarbons and nitriles. The thin embedded haze layers are much more numerous, and thinner, than the analogous thin layers observed in Titan's detached layer (typically 2-4 layers).  Understanding their formation for both Pluto and Titan is problematic because of their existence in a region of the atmosphere that is highly subsaturated.  Buoyancy waves generated by slow winds flowing over mountains may produce propogating (or even perhaps standing) temperature waves that have sufficiently large amplitudes to produce narrow vertical layers of supersaturation.  The highly uncertain saturation vapor pressures of the various hydrocarbons and nitriles at the low temperature encountered in Pluto's atmosphere makes accurate calculations of saturation values impossible.  However, the range of uncertainties allow the possibility that HCN could be the condensate making up the individual thin layers.  Figure 2. This shows Pluto's atmospheric model temperature profile (bottom scale) and particle sedimentation time (top scale).         Sedimentation timescales of the haze layer particles range from days to months.  Interestingly, the timescale for 0.1 micron particles at 30 km altitude to fall the average distance between observed haze layers (~ 10 km) is about 7 days, or comparable to Pluto's 6.4 day rotation rate.  The timescale for vertical dispersal of the thin layers, due to different size particles falling at different velocities, is thought to be very short, ranging from hours to days. The growth time scale for 0.1 micron particles, however, ranges from one to several days.  This argues for a monodispersive distribution of particles in the layers, as well as a rapid formation mechanism, a diurnal production modulation, and a wrapping of the layers around the planet as they fall.   This would require standing waves of supersaturation with similar propagation timescales.   Charon's Atmosphere:  Neither the REX  radio occultation nor the Alice solar occultation detected an atmosphere on Charon, with an 0.1 nanobar upper limit on surface pressure [5]. Pluto's low atmospheric escape rate (due to the cold upper atmosphere) is consistent with the non-detection of an atmosphere on Charon. However, Charon's dark pole invites speculation that its formation could be chemical alteration of cold polar surfaces by chemical reactions involving adsorbed atoms, molecules or radicals gravitationally captured from the gas streaming away from Pluto.   It is important to note that the current escape rate of Pluto may not be representative of a long-term Pluto average.  Understanding the distribution of volatiles on Pluto's surface and how they are influenced by climatic variation might help us understand how Pluto's atmospheric escape rate may have been different in the past.  Climatic change on Pluto could also change the climate and surface chemistry on Charon, as well as how much atmosphere it has. Conclusions: The New Horizons observations have delivered a revolution in our understanding of Pluto's atmosphere, and have set stringent constraints on Charon's atmosphere. These observations have also revealed some major surprises, such as the unexpectedly cold upper atmosphere of Pluto, and the globally extensive haze with its numerous thin embedded layers. These results suggest that an unknown agent, perhaps HCN, may play a larger role in atmospheric chemistry and thermodynamic processes than previously expected.  The more compact upper atmosphere also implies drastically lower escape rates of volatiles from Pluto than predicted, and so has important implications for volatile recycling and the long term evolution of Pluto's atmosphere. References: [1] S. A. Stern, et al. (2015) Science, 350, (2015). [2] L. A. Young et al. (2007) Space Science Review, 140, 93-127. [3] Lellouch Gurwell et al. 2015 AAS/DPS.4710507L). [4] P. Lavvas et al. (2013) PNAS, 110, 2729-2734. [5] Gladstone et al. (2015), AAS/DPS471115G  2864.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
