2870.PDF
OLAF - THE EASIEST WAY TO ARCHIVE YOUR DATA INTO THE PDS.  E. E. Palmer1 and C. Neese1, 1Planetary Science Institute, 1700 E. Fort Lowell, Suite #106, Tucson, AZ  85719, epalmer@psi.   Introduction:  Congress has mandated that research paid for by public funds should be available to the public.  NASA has responded to this by requiring R&A funded researchers to archive their datain some way.  Some of the data can be archived as part of published papers, especially in appendices or supplemental material.  However, frequently this is insufficient and a more formal archive with expanded documentation is necessary, which is where the Planetary Data System (PDS) comes in.  In addition to meeting these NASA requirements, archiving data in PDS also improves accessiblility to the scientific community, makes them easy availablility to NASA for mission planning and development.  It further insures that they will be preserved, along with all supporting information and documentation, for the use of scientists many decades into the future. While much of the PDS holdings are from flight missions with very large data volumes and large archiving budgets, the Small Bodies Node (SBN) of the PDS has been focusing on archiving R&A research data for the last 20 years.  Small data sets from individual PIs are important to archive, but the process of following the detailed PDS archiving requirements needed for a long-term archive is chalenging.  To support researchers in this task, the SBN created a tool that automates the label and volume building -- The On-Line Archiving Facility, or OLAF.   http://sbntools.psi.edu/olaf  What is OLAF?: OLAF is an on-line tool (which anyone can use to prepare data for archiving in PDS without specific knowledge of PDS archiving standards.  The user uploads data files and document files, and enters metadata and other information supporting the archive into a web form.  OLAF prepares the PDS labels and other required files, and assembles them into a PDS-compliant archive volume ready for review and archiving.  OLAF does full PDS standards validation and data validation as part of its generation process.  OLAF has been available to the research community for archiving planetary science data in the PDS since 2004. The archiving process: Submitting data to the PDS through OLAF is a collaborative process between PDS and the data provider.  An OLAF administrator is assigned to the data provider to provide any help needed during the submission process and to arrange for the data to be reviewed and finally archived.  All data sets submitted to the PDS are peer-reviewed, much the same as a science journal article. External reviewers are selected for each data set to ensure that the submission makes sense, is usable, and is fully documented. Peer review may result in a request for modifications and additional information in the submitted data set and constitute liens on the data set that need to be cleared before the data set can be accepted by the PDS. The data provider resolves these liens through OLAF, after which the data are archived and released to the public. Preparation.  Necessary preparations for submission of data include assembling and organizing the data files, converting the data files into formats compatible with PDS standards, and assembling the documentation set.    Data formats currently supported in OLAF include FITS images, general ASCII tables, and specialized ASCII tables such as spectra, lightcurves, and shape models.  There are specific formatting requirements for each of these format types which must be met for compliance with PDS standards.  If the data files do not already meet these format requirements they must be converted to a compliant format before uploading to OLAF.  The documentation set is intended to provide all information necessary to enable future users to understand and use the data.  If the data have been presented in a published paper, most of the documentation set for archiving can often be extracted from the paper.  The documentation set commonly includes descriptions of: . Content and organization of the data . Project that generated the data . Observation and data reduction methods used to obtain the data . Calibration of the data . Instruments and facilities used to obtain the data   . Relevant citations to the published literature Submitting data files into OLAF.  PDS archived data files are each accompanied by an external label providing metadata defining the structure, content, and search keywords for the data file.  OLAF generates the labels and populates them with information supplied by the data provider through a web form.  For example, for a table with columns, each column's name, description, format, units, and location in the file are supplied through a web form.  For a FITS image, the mapping of the keywords in the FITS header into the necessary keywords in the PDS label are also provided through a web form. 2870.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
This process would be onerous for large numbers of files, so a group of data files all of the same general format can be uploaded in a batch.  In this case, there is no need to fill out the web form for all the files individually, instead the information specific to each data file can be uploaded in a metadata table with one line per data file.  The data files, organized into their desired directory structure, and the metadata table are uploaded to OLAF in a zip file. Submitting the documentation set.  Basic required documentation, such as an abstract and overview for the data content and structure, are entered into text boxes for inclusion in the archive volume.  More extensive documentation can be uploaded in the form of PDF files.  All external references cited within the data documentation must be entered into OLAF's reference data base for inclusion in a comprehensive bibliography. Final steps.  After the data have been submitted into OLAF, the OLAF administrator provides internal review and recommendations of any corrections necessary before the peer review.  In SBN, non-mission data sets are collected and reviewed on an annual or biannual basis.  The data provider will be invited to participate by telecon to work out with the review panel the practical steps to make any necessary corrections or improvements.  These improvements can be carried out within OLAF. Once all liens from the peer review have been resolved, the OLAF administrator uses OLAF to generate the PDS volume for inclusion in the archive.  The data volume is archived and released to the public, and recieves a citation as an electronic publication which is included in the Astronomical Data System abstract service. Future Plans for OLAF:  The version of OLAF currently in operation produces archive volumes in the PDS3 standard, but PDS is now moving toward the new PDS4 standard which is very different.  Currently, OLAF data sets can be migrated to the PDS4 standard using SBN's migration software, but a new version of OLAF which produces directly in the PDS4 standard is now in development and will be deployed later in 2016.  This change will not be very noticeable to OLAF data providers, as OLAF takes care of the standards, whether PDS3 or PDS4, and the tool will look much the same to data providers aside from requiring a few extra metadata fields. Of more interest to data providers will be the planned expansion of data format capabilies.  OLAF now only supports FITS images, general ASCII tables, spectra, lightcurves, and shape models.  In the next year we plan to expand the number of data types supported by OLAF to other types of images, ISIS cubes, FITS images with extensions, and complex data objects containing multiple image objects, such as timeseries images and backplanes.           2870.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
