2879.PDF
VISIBLE AND THERMOPHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BEST-PRESERVED MARTIAN CRATERS, PART 1: DETAILED MORPHOLOGICAL MAPPING OF RESEN AND NOORD. L. L. Tornabene1, J. L. Piatek2, K. T. Hansen1, S. J. Hutchinson1, N. G. Barlow3, G. R. Osinski1,4, S. J. Robbins5, and A. S. McEwen6, 1Centre for Planetary Science & Exploration (CPSX) and Dept. of Earth Sciences, Western University (1151 Richmond Street, London, ON N6A 5B; ltornabe@uwo.ca), 2Dept. of Geological Sciences, Central Connecticut State Univ., New Britain, CT, 3Dept. Physics and Astronomy, Northern Arizona Univ., Flagstaff, AZ, 4Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Western University, London, ON, 5Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, CO, 6LPL, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.  Introduction:  This study is part of an ongoing effort to identify the best-preserved transitional and complex craters on Mars (D > 7 km) [see 1, 2], and thereby define their baseline morphological and thermophysical characteristics to: 1) place more rigorous and objective constraints on what defines the "bestpreserved" craters, in an attempt to provide more consistency regarding crater preservation terminology (e.g., pristine, fresh, young), 2) identify and quantify types of crater degradation as a function of locality/region to understand the geologic and climate history of Mars, and 3) improve our understanding of the impact process, including the role of impactor and target effects, and how target surfaces are affected by impact events (e.g., ejecta emplacement, effects of airblasts [e.g., 3, 4]).  Reported here are the preliminary morphological mapping results for two of the best-preserved simpleto-complex transitional craters on Mars: Resen (D = 7.6 km; 108.88째E, 27.94째S) and Noord (D = 7.8; 348.74째E, 19.27째S), located in Hesperia Planum and Noachis Terra, respectively.  Resen and Noord were selected based on the general characteristics outlined in [1]. The resulting morphologic maps from this effort will be used for a detailed comparison and correlation with the thermophysical maps, which are being produced and presented at this conference by Piatek et al. [5] as part of our overall joint-study.   General Methods: All Mars datasets were imported as an ArcGIS-project into ArcMap [6], with a hierarchy of HiRISE, CTX, THEMIS and either HRSC DTMs (if available) or MOLA MEGDR as a basemap. We note that continuous HiRISE coverage of these craters is not an issue. The general idea of our study is to map examples (with complete image coverage) of as many crater units/facies as possible rather than the entire extent of the crater (i.e., out to the most distal secondary crater rays). Based on meter- to decameterscale texture, tone, relief, and structure, various features were defined as morphologic units, traced as vector polygon layers, and symbolized by specific colours. These colours will be adjusted based on our interpretations of the initially defined units to illustrate similarities and differences between groups of units (e.g., related units being different shades of the same colour, etc.). Preliminary Results: Morphological Mapping. Thus far, both craters have been mapped to just beyond the rampart of the continuous ejecta (i.e., start of the discontinuous ejecta). But we intend to extend our maps (based on HiRISE coverage) to include:  both the discontinuous ejecta and 2-3 examples of secondary crater rays at different radial distances, and the target material outside of the apparent extent of these impacts (based on the TI pattern; see [5]). We have mapped 14 units in both craters to date (Fig. 1). These are grouped based on their morphologic characteristics, location (i.e., Ejecta, Rim/Wall, Floor) and based on their inferred relationships to each other; this is similar to how units were organized for the USGS map of Tooting crater [7]. We initially divided the crater Rim/Wall region into six units: Rim Material, Wall, Talus (Smooth), Talus (Coarse), Pitted Materials [see 8] (Slumps) and Slumps, with the latter being transitional between the wall and the floor. The Floor region is characterized by five units:   Pitted Materials (Floor), Smoother Floor Materials (Sparse Pits), Pitted Materials (Large Pits), Blocks/Megablocks and Aeolian Deposits (Floor). The ejecta deposits are divided into three units: Hummocky Ejecta, Pitted Materials (Ejecta) and Aeolian Deposits (Ejecta). Morphology and general thermophysical characteristics.  Despite the significant difference in spatial resolution between the visible (HiRISE and CTX) and thermal (THEMIS-TI) datasets (0.25 to 5m/pixel vs. 100 m/pixel), correlations between meter- to decameter-scale morphology and the sub-km scale thermophysical characteristics are remarkable (c.f., Fig. 1a-b with 1c). Higher TIs are associated with expected locations of bedrock (e.g., wall, slumps, floor blocks) and coarse-grained (boulder-sized) talus on the crater wall. Lower TIs also correlate with areas such as low-slopes and topographic lows, where unconsolidated finegrained materials (i.e., aeolian deposits) are expected to accumulate. Moderate TIs are on moderate to higher slopes where coarse unconsolidated deposits can accumulate below the angle of repose. There are several examples in both craters that highlight the fundamental difference between visible  2879.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
 Fig. 1. NE corner of Resen crater (Right) portion of the morphlogical map on HiRISE (Middle) HiRISE PSP_004008_1520 RED mosaic image (Left) THEMIS-derived TI I08479020.and thermal datasets. Visible radiance is limited to the    upper few microns of a surface, whereas thermal radiance is sensitive to 10s of cms of the subsurface [e.g., 9]; thereby, thermal data may reveal subsurface features (e.g., uplifted bedrock or megablocks that just underlie superficial deposits that are otherwise not visible in visible images. This is observed best on the floor of both craters which possess megablocks entrained in the pitted materials crater-fill deposits, some of which may represent portions of an incipient uplift.For more details on the quantitative thermal inertia and thermophysical mapping portions of our study, please see Piatek et al. [5]. Closing Remarks: We are seeking to phase out terms, such as "pristine", and "fresh" when describing crater preservation in the literature as: 1) preservation and age are not always correlated on active surfaces, and 2) high-resolution meter-scale images of what are thought to be the youngest and best-preserved impact craters on Mars indicate that even the youngest craters [e.g., 8, 10-12] show signs of modification by active geologic processes [1]. "Young" should not be used unless constraints on the crater's age are made, but it is important to note that "young" does not always equal "best-preserved" for the reasons mentioned above.  Regardless, workers should strive to thoroughly define as objectively as possible what is meant by such terms when used in publications. A new classification/description for craters that accounts separately for both age and preservation is currently under development as a result of this study. References: [1] Tornabene L. L. et al. (2015). LPSC 46, Abstract #2531. [2] Piatek J. L. et al (2015) LPSC 46, Abstract #2654. [3] Wrobel K. et al. (2006) MAPS, 41(10), 1539-1550. [4] Burleigh K.J. et al. (2012) Icarus, 217(1), 194-201. [5] Piatek J. L. et al. (2016), this conf. [6] ESRI (2011) ArcGIS Desktop: Release 10. Redlands CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute. [7] Mouginis-Mark P. J. (2015) US Geological Survey Scientific Investigations Map, 3297. [8] Tornabene L. L. et al. (2012), Icarus 220, 348-368.  [9] Elachi C. and Van Zyl J.J. (2006) John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 28. [10] Tornabene L. L. et al. (2006), JGR 111. [11] Hartmann W. et al. (2010), Icarus 208. [12] Piatek J. L. et al. (2014) LPSC 45, Abstract #2813. Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank NASA's Mars Data Analysis Program (NNX15AM41G) for supporting this work, and acknowledge Tornabene's personal Canadian-based support from the NSERC Discovery Grant programme and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA).   2879.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
