2883.PDF
THE MAP-X µ-XRF IMAGING SPECTROMETER. P. Sarrazin1, D. Blake2, K. Thompson1, M. Gailhanou3, J.Chen4 and T. Bristow2,  1 SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA  94043 (psarrazin@seti.org),  2  Exobiology Branch,NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA  94035,  3 CNRS, IM2NP UMR, Marseille, France, 4 Baja Technology, Tempe, AZIntroduction:  Many planetary  surface processesleave  traces  of their  actions  as  features  in  the  sizerange 10s to 100s of μm. The Mapping X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer ("Map-X") is intended to provideelemental  imaging  at  ≤100µm  spatial  resolution,yielding  elemental  chemistry  at  or  below the  scalelength where many relict physical, chemical, and biological features can be imaged and interpreted in ancient rocks. Map-X:  Map-X  is  an  arm-based  instrumentplaced directly on the surface of an object to be analyzed and held in registry with it  through the use oftouch sensors that physically contact the surface. During an analysis, either an x-ray tube or a radioisotopesource bombards the sample surface with x-rays (tubesource) or α-particles and γ-rays (radioisotope source),resulting in x-ray fluorescence from the sample. Fluoresced x-rays emitted in the direction of an x-ray sensitive CCD imager pass through an x-ray 1:1 focusinglens  that  projects  a  spatially  resolved  image  of thex-rays  generated  from  the  sample  surface  onto  theCCD. The CCD is read at several frames per secondso that in the majority of cases, no more than one photon strikes an individual pixel between read cycles. Inthis  way,  the  energies  and  positions  of  individualX-ray photons are recorded. The images are stored inmemory and  processed  using  algorithms  parameterized  from  the  ground.  In  a  single  analysis,  severalthousand  frames  are  both  stored  and  processed  inreal-time. The MapX concept is illustrated in fig. 1.Higher  level  data  products  that  can  be obtainedfrom the raw images include single-element maps forelements of interest with a lateral spatial resolution of≤ 100  µm and XRF spectra from selected Regions ofInterest (ROIs). XRF spectra from ROIs are processedon  the  ground  to  determine  quantitative  elementalcompositions.   Quantitative compositions  from ROIsare compared with known rock and mineral compositions to extrapolate the data to rock types and putativemineralogies. A single Map-X experiment provides elemental  and  compositional  maps  and  XRF  spectrahaving a spatial resolution of ≤  100 μm, commensurate with other imaging instruments.Proof of concept prototype:  An earlier prototype[1,2] was constructed to show the utility of the Map-Xconcept, but lacked some of the specific hardware andsoftware necessary for proper testing and evaluation ofthe  concept.   A second  prototype  was  custom  builtfrom  commercial  components  and  specialized  software (fig. 2).  A commercial camera with 1024x1024back illuminated deep depletion CCD, under vacuumwith a 200 µm Be window was used for the new prototype instrument (Andor iKon M).  Two 40kV-4W Autarget transmission window x-ray tubes (Moxtek) illuminate the sample from opposite sides of the camerato limit topographic contrast.  An MPO x-ray focusinglens  (PHOTONIS) is  placed equidistant  between thesample location and the CCD.  This reflective lens derives from "lobster-eye" multichannel  optics used forX-ray astronomy [3].  It is implemented here in a flatgeometry for 1:1 focusing.  This lens provides a muchimproved aperture when compared to pin-hole cameraoptics having  similar  spatial  resolution,  and  true focusing  when  compared  to  polycapillary  collimatingoptics also used for X-ray mapping.   The camera  isdriven  at  up  to 3 frames  per  second,  and  the  x-raysources are shuttered during read cycles.Fig. 1: Schematic drawing of the Map-X concept.Other work in progress:  Other  parts  of the instrument  development  are  being  pursued  in  parallelwith the proof of concept evaluation.Development of  data processing software.  The instrument collects a large number of short acquisitionsthat  are combined into X-Y-time data cubes.  Pythoncode was developed for processing raw CCD data ofthe prototypes.  This code includes background correction,  split  charge removal,  and optional  binning  features.  Resulting X-Y-energy data cubes are stored inHDF5 format and analyzed using PyMca [4] for quantitative analysis with fundamental parameter methods.Limited bandwidth of planetary missions will requireadditional on-board processing to further  reduce datainto alternative products such as XRD spectra of spa2883.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
tial  regions of interest,  or X, Y maps of spectral  regions of interest.Characterization and correction of the MPO pointspread function (PSF).  The MPO lens causes a signalspread on the detector that must be corrected for optimum spatial  resolution.   The PSF varies with signalenergy and  with  X-Y position  due morphological  orstacking  defects  of  the  micro-channels.   Dedicatedequipment is being built to characterize the lens PSFand software is being developed to deconvolve the PSFfrom the data.   Ray-tracing models of the MPO havebeen developed in  parallel  to evaluate  the  effects ofvarious types of defects on the PSF and to assist in thedevelopment of PSF deconvolution algorithms.Fig.  2:  2nd generation  prototype instrument  based oncommercial  components;  center:  CCD camera,  sides:X-ray tubes;  25 mm working distance.Development of high-TRL Map-X components.   Inparallel  with the method development and laboratoryand field prototype refinement, engineering efforts arebeing pursued to increase the TRL of the instrument.The main effort is the development of a Peltier cooledCCD  X-ray  camera  using  the  E2V  frame  transferCCD used in the MSL CheMin XRD/XRF instrument.Dedicated CCD electronics  using  flight  design  standards  are  being  developed and  a  breadboard  is  currently being  tested.   The new camera  prototype willdemonstrate  the basic architecture of a flight  camerafor an arm mounted instrument and will serve a basefor an in-vacuum Map-X prototype to characterize thesystem capabilities at the low X-ray energies (e.g., Kαlines for Na-K) that are absorbed in the in-air currentprototypes.Flow-down of  science  requirements.  Instrumentmodels are being developed for the X-ray source emission, fluorescence response of the sample, MPO transmission and CCD signal collection to provide criticaltools in the flow-down of system requirements.  Initialresults of this effort are presented in [5].Fig 3: Example of data output with the 2nd generationinstrument.  Top  left:  optical  image  of sample  composed of breccia fragments and light-toned cement.  ,scale is in mm; bottom left: Fe Kα and Ca Kα mapsobtained  by tiling  3  analyses  of  1000s  integration.Right:  XRF spectra of two regions of interest chosenin the MapX data.Fig  4:  Preliminary  design  of  a  MapX  planetaryarm  instrument.  The arm  unit  connects  to a  controlunit  (not  shown)  installed  in  the  rover/lander.  Thefront  end features a passive sample interface mechanism and one time actuation protective door.References: [1] D.F.  Blake  et  al.  (2014)  IPM-2014,  #1080[2] D.F. Blake et al. (2015) LPSC XLVI #2274.  [3] G.W.  Fraser  et  al.  (2010)  Planet.  Space  Sci.  58(1-2),79-95.   [4] V.A. Solé, et al. (2007) Spectrochim. ActaB 62 63-68.  [5]  K. A. Thompson, et al. (2016) thisconference.Acknowledgements:  PS  is  grateful  for  supportfrom  NASA/ARC's  Center  Innovation  Fund  andNASA's PICASSO program (grant # NNX14AI28A).2883.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
