 AEOLIAN TRANSPORT OF COARSE SEDIMENT IN THE MODERN MARTIAN ENVIRONMENT.  M. Baker1, K. W. Lewis1, N. Bridges2, C. Newman3, J. Van Beek4, M. Lapotre5, 1The Johns Hopkins University Morton K. Blaustein Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences (mmbaker@jhu.edu), 2Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, 3Ashima Research Corporation, 4Malin Space Science Systems, 5Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology.   Introduction: Aeolian processes are known to be dominant on many terrestrial bodies throughout our solar system. On Mars in particular, images returned from both orbital and landed cameras have revealed extensive wind-driven surface features, such as ripples and large dune fields. It has also long been known that periodic global dust storms enclose the planet and move substantial amounts of fine-grained sediment far distances. Evidence of both solidified aeolian bedforms and migrating sand dunes on Mars illustrate that wind has been and continues to be a major agent of surface modification [3] [7] [9]. The mechanisms guiding aeolian transport within Mars' low atmospheric pressure environment are still not fully understood. In general, the ability to move particles on a surface is determined by the size of the particle and the magnitude of the shear stress imparted by wind. A delicate balance between these variables will determine whether or not a grain can be moved by wind, and if it can, what mode of transport occurs (e.g., saltation, suspension, or surface creep) [2] [5]. Past studies using global circulation models (GCMs) and wind tunnels have helped shed light on Martian atmosphere-surface interactions [4] [6]. Results from these experiments, coupled with orbital observations of surface changes over time have helped build a theory of seasonally variable winds on Mars. Surface images taken at Gale crater, field site of the Curiosity Rover, allowed us to test this hypothesis by tracking changes in local aeolian features along the traverse. Over the course of the mission, our results show highly variable sediment mobility, consistent with past results from orbit showing strong seasonality, particularly during southern summer [1]. Methods: Change detection.  The primary component of this research study was visual inspection of Mastcam images (M100 camera) taken at seven different sites along the Curiosity traverse (between Sol 176 and Sol 1144). At each site in question, the rover was stopped for an extended period of time to do various in situ rock analyses or for solar conjunction events. At each site, we acquired an image when the rover arrived and another prior to leaving; the "before" and "after" images are separated by anywhere from 8 to 100 sols, depending on the site. An example of one of these Mastcam images is shown in Figure 1.  The M100 camera's high spatial resolution (0.22mm/pixel at a typical distance of 3 meters) allowed us to accurately resolve large sand grains and observe precise grain movement up to several meters away from the rover. Our study is most sensitive to the creep population, which is both large enough, and moves slowly enough, to detect by eye. We are not able to resolve the movement of saltating sand. Grain motion. A large number of these small-scale grain paths were then combined to reconstruct the average local wind directions and speeds. Grain motion was identified manually in Matlab and geometrically projected to determine the 2-D geographic motion vectors. Individual motion vectors were combined to generate a comprehensive picture of sediment transport at each site. Obtaining images from many sites over a long period of time helped us discern the effects of regional topographic feedback and seasonal variations in wind. Results: Overall, we observed that each site demonstrated either significant grain movement or virtually no grain movement; this distinction allowed for binary classification of wind dominated sites. UltiYellowknife Bay Cooperstown Kimberley Pahrump Marias Pass Clast Survey Delphia Perihelion 0 45 90 135 180 225 270 315 360 Ls MY31 MY32 MY33 Changes observed No Changes Figure 2: Timeline of the seven traverse stops made over the course of Mars Years 31-33. The three sites where grain movement was detected (marked in red) all occur close to or during southern summer. Figure 1: Example of a Mastcam image used for visual inspection of grain motion (Pahrump site, Sol 754).  mately, only three of the seven sites revealed grain motion; all three positive detections occurred near Ls~ 270˚ (close to perihelion and southern summer solstice). Figure 2 shows a full timeline of this study over three Martian years. The individual 2D grain motions at each site were combined to assess local wind directions. Two of the three sites revealed consistent net transport directions,   which we infer to be induced by consistent wind patterns. The third (Marias Pass) seemed to demonstrate more randomized motion. These discrepancies could be caused by local topographic interactions or by diurnal/seasonal changes in wind direction, both of which will be examined in greater detail in future work.. The overall wind direction results can be seen in the polar histograms shown in Figure 3.  Discussion: Here we present an examination of small-scale grain motion at seven different sites in Gale crater. Our results support the idea that sediment transport is strongly controlled by both seasonal changes and local topography. Although there seems to be a clear correlation between the time of year and the wind strength, it does not appear that wind acts in the same direction at every site, which could be caused by varying local topography and associated wind feedback. Future work will include calculation of minimum threshold velocities needed to initiate the grain motion that we observe at these sites. Given that a large number of grains observed in this study appear to be coarse sand or granules (>2 mm) it could be possible that infrequent but strong wind gusts are more responsible for surface-particle motion than any sustained wind. Comparing calculated threshold velocities to MarsWRF and REMS data will help evaluate this idea and build a more comprehensive picture of how sediment transport occurs on the modern Martian surface.  Furthermore, detecting modern aeolian transport within surface images taken by Curiosity could aid in deciphering the history and preservation of cemented aeolian sandstones in Gale Crater. In situ studies such as the one described here help shed light on the conditions responsible for deposition of these ancient bedforms across the Martian landscape [8]. References: [1] Ayoub, F., Avouac, J. P., Newman, C. E., Richardson, M. I., Lucas, A., Leprince, S., & Bridges, N. T. (2014). Threshold for sand mobility on Mars calibrated from seasonal variations of sand flux. Nature communications, 5.  [2] Bagnold R. A. (1941) The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes (New York: Methuen)  [3] Cardinale, M., Silvestro, S., Vaz, D. A., Michaels, T., Bourke, M. C., Komatsu, G., & Marinangeli, L. (2016). Present-day aeolian activity in Herschel Crater, Mars. Icarus, 265, 139-148. [4] Greeley, R., Skypeck, A., & Pollack, J. B. (1993). Martian aeolian features and deposits: Comparisons with general circulation model results. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets (1991-2012), 98(E2), 3183-3196.  [5] Kok, J. F., Parteli, E. J., Michaels, T. I., & Karam, D. B. (2012). The physics of wind-blown sand and dust. Reports on Progress in Physics, 75(10), 106901.  [6] Laity, J.E. Bridges, N.T. (2009). Ventifacts on Earth and Mars: analytical, field, and laboratory studies supporting sand abrasion and windward feature development. Geomorphology, 105 (3-4) pp. 202-217. [7] Liu, Z. Y. C., & Zimbelman, J. R. (2015). Recent near-surface wind directions inferred from mapping sand ripples on Martian dunes. Icarus, 261, 169-181. [8] Milliken, R. E., Ewing, R. C., Fischer, W. W., & Hurowitz, J. (2014). Wind-blown sandstones cemented by sulfate and clay minerals in Gale Crater, Mars. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(4), 1149-1154. [9] Sullivan, R., et al. (2008), Wind-driven particle mobility on Mars: Insights from Mars Exploration Rover observations at "El Dorado" and surroundings at Gusev Crater, J. Geophys. Res., 113, E06S07.  12.5  25N SW E Pahrump N = 179  5  10  15N SW E Marias Pass N = 131  5  10  15  20N SW E Yellowknife Bay N = 84 Figure 3: Polar wind plots (direction wind is coming from) for the three sites where grain movement was detected, where N = number of moving grains. For each site, individual motion vectors were binned by direction to assess general wind patterns. Overall, Yellowknife Bay and Pahrump exhibit more consistent net grain motions than Marias Pass. 