2897.PDF
ON THE EVOLUTION OF THE MAIN BELT ASTEROIDS.  K. A. Holsapple1 and T. Henych1, 1University of Washington 352400, Seattle, WA  98195.  holsapple@aa.washington.eduIntroduction: Over the last two decades, there hasbeen a rapid  growth  of asteroid light  curve observations. One of the main benefits of those observations isinformation on asteroid spins.  There are spin data foralmost six thousand asteroids from the efforts of observers  from all  over the world.  The present  spin  ofany asteroid is a result of its history.  The analysis ofthat history is the subject of this contribution. Theoretical Approaches: Figure 1 shows the distribution of asteroid spin versus its diameter. There aresome well-described features that  are evident  in  thatplot;  the  most  well-known  now is  the  gravity  spinlimit  at  the  period  of  about  2.3  h.  (We emphasizeagain that the limit does not imply rubble-pile asteroidstructure, a rock asteroid would have that same gravitylimit.) Other features still remain puzzling. A commonway to understand such a distribution is to construct atheoretical model and run numerical simulations of anartificial population of asteroids and try to reconstructwhat we observe. The previous studies that attemptedto do so include [1], [2], [3], [4],  [5], [6] and others.Here we update those approaches with several important modifications. The primary elements of the prior  studies and ofthe present one are 1) a population of asteroids in a finite region, 2) a distribution of impact velocities andangles, 3) the efficiency of angular  momentum transfer in an impact, 4) the loss or gain of mass and angular  inertia,  5) the amount,  direction and speed of thecratering ejecta. We note that the characteristics of theejecta  are  especially  important,  firstly  identified  by[2].  We upgrade the ejecta analysis to include recentresults on ejecta scaling ([7], [8]). We use some recentexperimental results on the angular momentum transfer efficiency and we also update the asteroid population estimates. Contrary to the previous studies, we do not averageover the distribution of the impact velocities and angles. A key outcome of such averaging is a quadraticaccumulation of spin magnitudes from averaged singleimpacts.  We  reject  that  approach  for  two  reasons.First, because of the momentum drain effect, the resultof any one impact is not independent of the prior ones.Second, it has been found that the current spin of anasteroid is more likely caused by a very few large impacts  and  not  by an  accumulation  of random  smallones. Therefore, we performed Monte Carlo analyses ofthe effects of a large number of impacts into a largenumber of target asteroids. The outcomes are distributions of spin versus asteroid size, which can then becompared to the actual data. Some of the typical simulations are shown in Figure 2.Results:  First (and as found by others), the spinsof the large asteroids cannot  have resulted from impacts with the current population. A much larger population is required.  Second, both the average spin andthe maximum spin at any given size falls off with increasing  asteroid size.  Third,  there  may be "averageequilibrium  spin  states",  defined  by a  curve of spinversus  diameter.  For  asteroids  spinning  faster  thanthat  state,  the average next  impact  will  always slowthe  spin;  but for an  asteroid  with  a  spin  below thatstate the average impact will increase its spin.  That isan  effect of the  preferential  ejection  of ejecta in  thespin direction of the surface.There are reasonable parameter choices that resultin  the average equilibrium curve consistent  with theaverage  spins,  and  with  the  resulting  distributionscentered along that curve. Then there is also a "maximum equilibrium spin curve" defined as the maximumpossible spin an asteroid can attain,  again  as a function of asteroid size.  That  bounds the upper limit  ofasteroid  spins,  and  has  a  downward  power slope of0.65.  The fact  that  the  maximum equilibrium  curveintersection with the gravity limit curve occurs right atthe 10 km upper bound of the data for binary asteroidsstrongly suggests that  it  is collision spin-up and  notYORP that creates the spins that result in binaries. Finally, a single large impact into an asteroid with a preexisting average spin can easily reduce its spin to nearzero. That may explain the excess of slow spinners (ascompared to Maxwellian) for the spin distributions ofthe asteroids with diameters larger than 10 km.These results  and  others will be presented at  theconference.References: [1] McAdoo D.  C.  and  Burns  J.  A.(1973)  Icarus,  18, 285-293.  [2]  Dobrovolskis A. R.and Burns J. A.  (1984) Icarus, 57, 464-476. [3] Harris A. W. (1979) Icarus, 40, 145-153. [4] Davis D. R.et al. (1989) In:  Asteroids II, Proceedings of the Conference,  Tucson,  AZ,  805-826.  [5]  Farinella  P.  et al.(1992) Astronomy and Astrophysics, 253, 604-614. [6]Henych T. and Pravec P. (2013) MNRAS, 432, 16231631.  [7] Housen K. R. and Holsapple K. A. (2011)Icarus, 211, 856-875. [8] Holsapple K. A. and HousenK. R. (2012) Icarus, 219, 297-306.2897.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Figure  1. Asteroid  spins  versus  their  diameter  andsome characteristic features of that graph.  Figure 2. Evolution of spin due to the collisions of alarge number of individual asteroids.2897.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
