2898.PDF
FACILITIES, INDIVIDUALS, AND INDIVIDUALS IN FACILITIES.  D. A. Papanastassiou, Science Div., Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, M/S 183-335, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109 (dap@jpl.nasa.gov).   What's in a name? That which we call a Facility may not always smell as sweet. As we embark on examining the need for and use of Facilities, it is necessary to define the key attributes of a Facility and apply the term only when the attributes are met and meant. A Facility: a. consists of a group of talented persons who provide a reliable analytical capability or service; b. includes state-of-the-art instruments which are maintained at the state-of-the-art and are operated by Facility staff (efficient maintenance includes funded service contracts); c. is well funded, so that the talented personnel does not have to depend on support from fickle user fees; d. while part of the available time may be used by talented facility persons and other interested persons for development of new capabilities, it is expected that the Facility is reliable and available to users for a large portion of time. The corollary is that the analytical capabilities are well developed and, therefore, may be considered routine. In this use, "routine" is not a pejorative term. It simply means consistent and reliable capabilities, not under constant development, so that guest investigators know what to expect when their samples are being analyzed, without the risks from  a newly modified instrument; e. To the extent that the Facility instruments operate at the state of the art, they need to be operated by experienced personnel and not by the guest investigators, who are not adequately trained. f. Use of the "routine" capabilities of a Facility is based on the payment of established user fees, but members of the Facility do not expect to become co-authors of the  papers that use the data obtained by guest investigators of the Facility.   In summary a Facility is a laboratory which provides a reliable analytical service, by a well-funded group of analysts. A Facility may be updated by its staff but mostly provides a well-defined (routine) service. A Facility may also adopt an added function, with added personnel, to develop new capabilities. But the functions of development and of routine operation are quite distinct. Development of new capabilities within a Facility is not different than development of new capabilities by individual PIs who may or may not be associated with a Facility. If this definition of a Facility is kept in the forefront, then there should be no conflict between standalone PIs developing new research capabilities and staff in a Facility working independently to develop further capabilities. An even casual consideration of laboratories and facilities in Cosmochemistry and in Geochemistry shows that most Facility owners and guest users are collaborating on research. But the main distinction is not whether work is being done in Facilities or in PI laboratories. The true distinction is the ability of agencies to fund innovative work. In all discussions, including Review Panel discussions, it is clear that the cost of even the most expensive instruments are dwarfed by the cost of the personnel needed to develop, operate, and maintain such instruments. The concept that funding of Facility instruments will lead to more efficient (i. e., less expensive research) is an illusion, not supported by facts. I would like to review work that opened up new fields of research and a new understanding of the Solar System in one laboratory, which was well-funded during the Apollo Program. The advantage of the Apollo Program was that it brought together many different investigators and disciplines, to develop new research capabilities and research areas. The Lunatic Asylum, under G. J. Wasserburg, during Apollo, allowed the coexistence of experts in analytical chemistry, including nuclear chemistry, mass spectrometry, electron microscopy and petrology, and noble gas mass spectrometry.  A few examples: a. The development of the first (and only, before and during the Apollo missions) high precision Lunatic I mass spectrometer, allowed the determination of a Rb-Sr lunar chronology. b. The parallel development of the 40Ar-39Ar and especially measurements on plagioclase separates from mare basalts also provided a reliable lunar chronology c. In addition to mass spectrometry, the immense contributions of individuals should not 2898.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
be underestimated. I will just take one case, from personal experience, Dr. Fouad Tera. His participation was enabled by adequate funding during Apollo. 1. He developed the chemical separation techniques for Gd, for the measurement of secondary thermal neutron capture effects in the lunar regolith. This allowed one to address the stratigraphy and evolution of the upper few meters of the lunar regolith. This was expanded to the separation of Sm to address epithermal neutron capture effects. It also led to Don Burnett's lunar neutron probe, which flew on Apollo 17 and provided an active, in situ measurement of the secondary neutron flux in the top 2.5 meters of the lunar regolith. The Gd measurements also benefited from the discovery that thermal ionization for Gd and Sm was greatly enhanced for GdO+ and SmO+. Since the ionization of Gd, Sm, and Nd oxides progresses from the levels of 0.01%, to 0.1%, to several %, the development of Sm-Nd dating and isotope systematics were not far behind. Sm-Nd dating and isotope systematics have revolutionized our understanding of planets; 2. Dr. Tera also developed U-Th-Pb capabilities with low blanks; these capabilities were not available during the Apollo missions. One of the fundamental results of his work was the recognition that the Moon (and Earth) were subjected to an intense flux of impacting bodies, termed the Lunar Cataclysm, 4.0 Ga ago. This concept is still a cornerstone for lunar chronology and has its supporters and non-supporters. It has led to a new understanding of the evolution of the Solar System and planetary dynamics; 3. As a serendipity development, when Dave Schramm decided to measure high precision Mg isotope ratios, he was flustered by the lack of a process for ionization of Mg. Observing Schramm's difficulties, Dr. Tera loaded some Mg, using the techniques developed for Pb (silica gel + phosphoric acid) and gave the loaded filament to Schramm. In the middle of the night Dave obtained several volts of Mg ions. The emission of Mg ions from a molten silicate glass had to be tamed, but a new era was born, which eventually led to the discovery of 26Al, admittedly about 6 years later. 4. Later, Kelly and Larimer decided that a search for extinct 107Pd was justified based on their calculations of the condensation of FeNi. The search was started in the Lunatic Asylum, based on assurances by Dr. Tera that the separation of Ag from FeNi was very simple. That was true, but it took three years to resolve other issues (e. g., 75As32S mass interference on 107Ag  and Ag contamination on iron meteorite surfaces) and to develop the 107Pd-107Ag chronometer. 5. Even after Dr. Tera left Caltech for DTM, I called and asked if there was a good way to separate Ti from Allende inclusions. He said, "yes, there is a simple technique, but we are packing to go to Virginia Beach; I will send you notes". Sure enough, handwritten notes, in pencil arrived in the mail, within a week (no Iinternet then). The separation of Ti based on the strong titanium hexafluoride complex was developed and endemic Ti isotope anomalies discovered, including FUN effects. These examples were only for the purpose of demonstrating the obvious, namely that important discoveries are made by individuals, including when multidisciplinary approaches are necessary.  So while we address the need and use of Facilities, it is important to consider that individual researchers are critical and ultimately the key to discoveries and analytical developments. Individuals are more expensive than instruments. If we want to build 1st class Research and 1st class Facilities, we need to support key individuals as well as provide a climate, whereby key, talented individuals will be attracted to work on Cosmochemistry. Thinking about Facilities rather than of the key individuals in key and interrelated disciplines is counterproductive. This is a personal opinion, based on many decades of experience, including working with the best. It is supported by so many references, that there is no space even to start.  Copyright 2016, California Institute of Technology. U.S. Goverment sponsorship acknowledged. 2898.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
