 MAPPING WATER AND WATER-BEARING MINERALS ON MARS WITH CRISM.   R. N. Clark1, G. A. Swayze2, S. L. Murchie3, F. P. Seelos3, C. E. Viviano-Beck3, and J. Bishop4,  1Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ, 2U.S. Geological Survey, Denver, CO, 3Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Maryland, 4SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA. Introduction:  Water is expressed in martian spectra  mainly at  two wavelengths  in  the  near  infrared: near  3-microns, the O-H stretching fundamental,  and near 1.9 to 2.1 microns with an OH stretch + H-O-H bend combination  (hereafter  called the 2-micron  absorption).  A third location, the first overtone of the OH stretch, near 1.4 microns may also appear.  The 3micron  absorption  shows  strongly  in  every  CRISM Mars spectrum we have examined except when fresh CO2 frost  covers  the  surface  with  sufficient  depth. Where present, the 3-micron water absorption is saturated, indicating the presence of water in the percent range but shows little variability in band depth across the surface.  The pervasive fine grained dust on Mars creates  increasing  scattering  at  shorter  wavelengths, weakening or masking the apparent 1.4-micron water absorption  in  Mars  reflectance spectra.   That  leaves the 2-micron water absorption often as the most diagnostic absorption for detecting larger amounts of water in  the  optical  surface.   Frequently the  2-micron  absorption  is  stronger  than  the  metal-OH combination bands in the 2.2- to 2.3-micron region. Historically, the 2-micron water absorption has received little attention as a feature to diagnose mineralogy.   However,  with  available  spectral  libraries,  we can  examine  if  this  feature  might  be  diagnostic  of mineralogy.  Different  mineral  groups have different hydrogen bonding, shifting the position and width of the water absorption (Figure 1).  Analysis of available spectra  obtained  in  dry environments  [1]  show that some  minerals  or  mineral  groups  can  be  uniquely identified.   Along with  the  wavelength  position  and width of the absorptions plotted in Figure 1, the shape, including asymmetry and shoulders from overlapping water  absorptions  further  separate  absorptions  from different minerals, improving discrimination. We use the new CRISM Map-projected Targeted Reduced Data  Record (MTRDR) image cubes [2]  to enable a new sophistication in detection and mapping of materials using the 1.9-micron water feature.   We have developed a new version of Tetracorder [3] that expands  capabilities  and  wavelength  range  allowing for more sophistication of the expert system for identification  and  mapping  of materials  in  CRISM  data. The new system includes automated curved continua to detect trace compounds whose spectral features are superimposed on other spectral features.  For example, curvature of the 2-micron pyroxene absorption creates a false positive water absorption detection if straight line continua  are used.  Curved continua  reduces the false positives, enabling weaker water spectral features to be detected. Results:  We  have  analyzed  over  200  CRISM scenes, and find diverse signatures of water using the 2-micron absorption.  We find water bearing zeolites and sulfates are most common in the scenes mapped so far.  Also abundant are hydrated silica, and smectite clays.  An example result is shown in Figure 2, where mixed  zeolites  and  sulfates  dominate.   The  results, like those shown in Figure 2, can be further sub-divied into the specific zeolites and specific sulfates indicated by the absorption positions and shapes. We find water rich materials are commonly found wherever  there  are  erosion  slopes.   The  top surface layer  appears desiccated, consistent with Feldman et al. (AGU 2015 abstract).  We find diverse water-bearing mineralogy eroding from slopes, often in complex mixtures as shown in Figure 2, or mono-minerologies in other locations. The latest mapping results will be presented at the meeting. References: [1] Clark  R. N.,  et al.  (2007) USGS digital  spectral  library  splib06a:  U.S.  Geological  Survey, Data Series 231, http://speclab.cr.usgs.gov/spectral-lib.html. [2]  Seelos, F. P.,  M. F. Morgan,  H. W. Taylor,  S.  L. Murchie, D. C. Humm, K. D. Seelos, O. S.  Barnouin, C.  E.  Viviano,  and  C.  R.  I.  S.  M.  Team  (2012), CRISM  Map  Projected  Targeted  Reduced  Data Records (MTRDRs) - High level analysis and visualization data products, in Planetary Data: A Workshop for Users  and  Software  Developers,  U.S.  Geological Survey, Reston,  Va.   [3]  Clark,  R.N.,  Swayze, G.A., Livo,  K.E.,  Kokaly,  R.F.,  Sutley,  S.J.,  Dalton,  J.B., McDougal, R.R., and Gent, C.A., 2003, Imaging spectroscopy: Earth and planetary remote sensing with the USGS Tetracorder and expert systems, Journal of Geophysical  Research,  Vol.  108(E12),  5131, doi:10.1029/2002JE001847, p. 5-1 to 5-44, December, 2003.  http://speclab.cr.usgs.gov/PAPERS/tetracorder  http://speclab.cr.usgs.gov/spectral-lib.html http://speclab.cr.usgs.gov/PAPERS/tetracorder Illustration 1: Figure 1.  Water absorption positions and widths derived from the USGS spectral library [1] for materials measured in a dry environment. Illustration 2: Figure 2.  CRISM Tetracorder water absorption map for 14 possible compounds, not all of which were found in this scene.  Here zeolites and sulfates dominate. 