 PHOTOMETRIC CORRECTION FOR THE THERMAL CHANNELS FOR THE DIVINER LUNAR RADIOMETER EXPERIMENT.  K. A. Shirley1, D. S. McDougall1, B. T. Greenhagen2, T. D. Glotch1, and the Diviner Science Team. 1Department of Geosciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2100, katherine.shirley@stonybrook.edu, 2Johns Hopkins University, Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723.   Introduction:  The Diviner Lunar Radiometer Experiment on the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter is currently mapping multispectral thermal emission from the lunar surface [1]. These data provide key insights into the surface composition of the Moon, primarily from the three narrow channels centered near 8 µm where the Christiansen Feature (CF) is located. The CF is diagnostic of mineralogy, as its position changes as a function of silicate composition [2,3]. Diviner also maps the lunar surface at longer thermal wavelengths (23-400 µm), which have not generally been used in mineralogical analyses, but contain other imporntant mineral indicators. This work aims to make the Diviner thermal infrared data more useful for mineralogical classification of the lunar surface. In previous work we found that emissivity of the long wavelength channels varies as a function of solar incidence angle [4,5], and have experimented with several methods for correcting emissivity as a function of incidence angle. A correction has been developed for the 8 µm channels that normalizes all Diviner daytime data to 0° incidence angles at the equator [6]. Here we describe our current correction for the thermal wavelengths that adopts a similar normalization method. Methods: Our correction assumes that the data measured at an incidence angle of 0° are ideal and radiance values measured under these conditions are close to true. Starting with a set of radiance measurements and their corresponding incidence angles, our method begins by normalizing the radiance data to the highest value at the lowest incidence angle. A curve is then fit to the normalized data, describing the observed fraction of "true" radiance as a function of incidence angle (Figure 1). These calibration curves are created using a boxcar method and stored for each channel per pixel within Figure 1. Normalized radiance data from a homogeneous region near the equator with accompanying fitted curve. Figure 2. Channel 6 of the homogeneous equatorial test scene (147-148 E, 0-1 N) before (A) and after (B) the correction. A B    the scene. The original data is then corrected by normalizing it to the calibration curve as a function of incidence angle, after which the corrected radiance is converted to emissivity. We have tested this method on several small (1x1 to 8x8 degrees) locations on the Moon starting with relatively homogeneous regions of mare or highlands material, then more complex regions of mare and highlands material with features such as large craters.  Results: The applied correction normalized the data and consistently increased the emissivity for the higher incidence angle measurements, bringing them closer to the emissivity values measured at 0° incidence. Without the correction we observed variation close to 10% in spectra; with the correction we have decreased this to ~2%. Figure 2 shows this improvement for channel 6 for our homogeneous equatorial scene, and Figure 3 shows the improvement in the spectra from a spot within the northeastern section of Figure 2.  Conclusions/Future Work: The current correction normalizes the data as a function of incidence angle, which increases the spectral emissivity, and allows for reliable interpretation of the emissivity data measured at varying incidence angles. This improves our ability to use data collected in the thermal wavelengths and allows us to use this data to augment our interpretation of the lunar surface composition. Improvements can be made to the correction by improving handling of scenes at high latitudes with large incidence angles, as well as improving image quality across various terrains and illumination conditions. We have a number of parameters at our disposal to achieve this, including dynamic boxcar sizes according to data density, selection and usage of data based on measurement conditions, and quantifying differences in terrain. These results illustrate the potential this approach has for contributing to our future understanding of the composition of the lunar surface.  Acknowledgements: We gratefully acknowledge NASA's support of the LRO mission and the great work of the Diviner Operations Team in collecting the data sets used for this research. Support for this work was provided by the LRO Extended Mission  science program and the RIS4E SSERVI team.  References: [1] Paige D.A. et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev. 150, 125160 [2] Greenhagen B.T. and Paige D.A. (2006) LPSC XXXVII, #2406 [3] Greenhagen B.T. et al. (2010) Science 329, 1507-1509 [4] Shirley K.A. & Glotch T.D. (2014) LPSC XLV, #2399 [5] Shirley K.A. & Glotch T.D. (2014) SSERVI Exploration Science Forum [6] Greenhagen B.T. et al. (2011) LPSC XLII, #2679  Figure 3. The emissivity spectra from a location within the homogeneous region  before (blue) and after (red) the correction is applied. 