 PHOTOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF PLUTO.  M. W. Buie1, S. A. Stern1, L.  A. Young1, C. B. Olkin1, H. A. Weaver2, K. Ennico3, W. M. Grundy4, J. M. Moore3, R. A. Beyer3,5, P. Schenk6 and the New Horizons Sceince Team. 1Southwest  Research  Institute  (buie@boulder.swri.edu),  2Johns  Hopkins  APL,  3NASA Ames  Research  Center, 4Lowell Observatory, 5Carl Sagan Center at the SETI Institute, 6LPI Introduction:  From the first lightcurves taken of Pluto in 1954, it  was clear that its surface had large stable regions of variegated albedo.  Since that time, the variations have been studied to determine the properties of the surface, both in albedo (static or variable) and in composition. The  New  Horizons  flyby  of  Pluto  provides  a wealth of information for further  refining our understanding  of  Pluto's  surface[1].   Beyond  the  obvious value of increased spatial resolution, the geometries of the new data are considerably different from that afforded  an  Earth-vicinity  view  and  significantly  improve  on  our  ability  to  extract  surface  photometric properties.  These properties are essential for removal of illumination and viewing geometry effects that also appear to change the appearance of the surface but in themselves  are  confusing  when  trying  to  understand other  properties  of  the  surface;  such  as  a  principal component analysis of spectrophotometric data to look for compositional variations. We have used a combination of historical measurments of Pluto with the New Horizons data to further refine our understanding of Pluto's surface.  This is a very complicated problem that will take some time to unravel but here we report on initial efforts and some early results. Method: The surface reflectance theory developed by Hapke is a powerful tool for the study of light reflected from a planetary surface[2].   This underlying methodology was used with earlier HST observations [3,4] to derive global photometric properties combined with  a  single-scattering  albedo  (w)  map.   The  additional properties needed for a  full description are: h surface  compaction  parameter,  P(g) -  single  particle scattering phase function,  B0 - backscatter parameter, and  θ -  mean  surface  roughness.   Single-scattering albedo is clearly a spatially variable quantity.  The rest of the values are often determined as global quantities and applied to all terrains.  This approximation is often needed since there is rarely enough information to permit their independent determination along with albedo. For most solid surfaces, treating these other values as global has worked reasonably well.  The high degree of surface variations on Pluto is, however, a warning that  such  global  treatments  may  work  more  poorly here than on other bodies.  Nonetheless, we must start somewhere in our analysis. From the earlier HST-based work, there were 6 sets of  global  parameters  (h,P(g),B0,θ)  identified[3,4]. These sets, labeled A-F, are equally able to match the observed variation in photometric properties of Pluto's surface from the restricted range of phase angle possible from Earth.  The constrained range in this case is from 0.36 to 1.74 degrees.  Rather than try to determine an actual function for  P(g), a constant was used over this phase angle range. For  this  initial  investigation,  we  have  applied  a simple  process  to  the  resolved  New  Horizons  data. Given  a  set  of  global  photometric  parameters,  each pixel in a New Horizons image that maps onto the surface of Pluto is inverted.  This process takes the observed count rate, converts to absolute flux, then to bidirectional reflectance (r), and finally solving for the single-scattering albedo that gives the proper value of r.  At that point, the illumination and viewing geometry effects inherent in the image have been removed. The image of w is then converted to a normal albedo chosen to be at normal illumination and viewing direction but at 1 degree phase angle.   The slight shift in phase  angle  moves us  off  of  the peculiar  reluctance properties of particulate surfaces at ultra-low phase angles.   We call  this  normal  albedo  even  though  it  is technically not.  The important thing is that this rendering  lets  us  see  something  directly  related  to  surface albedo without any geometric effects included. To assess the quality of the inversion, a region was chosen in the north polar terrains of Pluto from N5585 degrees.  This region was extracted from 8 images ranging  in  time  over  the  6  days  prior  to  close  approach.  The chosen terrain is thus seen to rotate under the  spacecraft  viewpoint  and  is  always  in  view  but with differing viewing geometries.   The phase angle range for these observations is quite limited due to the encounter  geometry and only spans 15.3 to 16.2 degrees.  For this analysis, we thus chose a new value of P(g)  to  hold  for  this  range  and  is  reduced  from the HST set by a reasonable amount (more on this later). Since the goal of the inversion is to remove illumination and viewing geometry variations, the resulting inversion should give the same result for w on all 8 images and should do so over the entire region of interest.   This  region  on  Pluto  has  far  less  variation  in albedo than any other region of this size that was seen on Pluto.  Using this method we can then compare the trend of  r versus the cosine of the emission angle (or  incidence angle) to this same trend for normal albedo. A plot of r will show the ensemble limb-darkening behavior and the normal albedo should be flat. Results: All  six  sets  of  photometric  parameters were  investigated  along  with  some variations  in  the other  parameters.   Since these data are at a different phase  angle  than  HST,  a  new  value  of  P(g) was needed.  The value chosen was P(g)=1.7 for sets A, B, C, and F;  P(g)=1.5 for set D, and  P(g)=1.9 for set E. These  values  were  based  on  relative  scaling  for  the phase  function  used  for  Triton.   The  training  set  is from LORRI monochrome imaging that has better longitude coverage.  Of the six photometric sets, set C is clearly the best with the values  of  h=0.05,  P(g)=1.7, B0=1.0, θ=10.  Note that this is using the formalism as published in the 1993 version of Hapke's book [3]. These  parameters  are  effective  at  removing  any limb-darkening effects for illumination and viewing directions within 78 degrees of the surface normal.  At the highest angles from vertical, the inversion does not work  as  well.   Part  of  this  problem is  due  to  local slopes being a more important correction nearer to the limb.  We avoid this problem by excluding these regions from the training set. We investigated the sensitivity of  all  photometric parameters on this inversion process by perturbing one parameter at a time.  For h, P(g), and B0 the result is to change  the  single-scattering  albedos  independent  of viewing geometry within a give set, though each set has its own limb-darkening behavior.  The mean-surface  slope  value  does  significantly  affect  the  limbdarkening and a range from 5-30 degrees was investigated.   The previously adopted  value  of  10  degrees was the best value, despite the fact that the prior HST maps provided essentially no constraint on this quantity and the value was adopted from a similar type of analysis for Triton. Using  the  best  set  (C),  we  then  converted  the MVIC  PCOLOR_2  data  to  w,  then  normal  albedo. This gives us four distinct colors to compare and combine.  All four MVIC filters (BLUE, RED, NIR, and CH4) reveal distinct surface properties.  This much is already evident from false-color images but these data products  now  allow  a  more  quantitative  approach. This work is still on going but there are a few trends that are emerging. Not  surprisingly,  the  darkest  near-equatorial  regions (eg., Cthulu Regio) are well separated in albedo, color as well as in color ratios.  Note that all feature names in this discussion are still informal.  The dark unit is also very tightly clustered in albedo space compared to all other regions. When viewed relative  to the RED filter  data,  all other  colors  show  a  weak  mixing  line  between  the darkest and brightest end-members.  However, most of the terrain is most likely to be at the ends of the range and the intermediate cases  are  very much less  common.  Additionally,  the mixing line between the two end members is never seen to fall on a strictly linear trend. In the monochrome LORRI data and MVIC NIR and CH4, the most reflective regions are the southern end of Sputnik Planum and the most neutrally colored portions of the north polar terrains.  In the BLUE and RED MVIC filters the brightest north polar terrain is slightly less reflective than southern Sputnik Planum. The most  neutrally  colored  regions  appear  to be the east side of Tombaugh Regio. References: [1] Stern, S. A. et al. (2015) Science, 350, 292-300. [3] Hapke, B. (2012) Theory of Reflectance and Emittance  Spectroscopy,   Cambridge  University  Press. [2] Buie,  M.  W.  et  al.  (2010)  AJ,  139,  1117-1127. [3] Buie, M. W. et al. (2010) AJ, 139, 1128-1143. 