2934.PDF
PARTICLE SIZE DISTRIBUTION INFLUENCE ON ACCESS OF SOLAR WIND TO LUNAR REGOLITH.  A. V. Kulchitsky1,  D. M. Hurley2,   J. B. Johnson1,  P. Duvoy1,  M. Zimmerman2    1University of AlaskaFairbanks, Institute of Northern Engineering, P.O. Box 755910-5910, Alaska 755910, USA, anton.kulchitsky@alaska.edu, 2Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723.Introduction: Solar wind protons potentially are asource of hydration for the lunar regolith. This occursbecause the solar wind impinges uninhibited on the lunar surface when the Moon is in the solar wind. Theprotons implant themselves ~10 nm into the surface ofthe  regolith  grain  encountered.  The  subsequent  processes are more poorly quantified,  but  might includediffusion out of the grain, formation of OH bonds, orthe release of H2O molecules.Owing to the porosity of regolith on the Moon, theions have access through pore space to grains that arepartially or fully buried.  This work quantifies the relationship between regolith particle size distribution andsolar wind access.The Approach:  In the previous work [1] we developed  a  method  of  using  a  discrete  element  method(DEM)  model  COUPi [2]  to  study  the  penetrationdepth of solar wind protons into the upper level of lunar regolith. We created regolith particle beds of different porosity by gravitational deposition of polyhedronsrepresenting  grains.  We achieved  the  porosities  in  arange from 0.43 to as high as 0.61. The previous workdealt with mono-disperse particle size distributions. Inthis work we study how particle size distribution (PSD)affects the proton penetration depth.To study the influence of regolith PSD we used anactual PSD of JSC1a lunar simulant [3]. Fig. 1 showsthe  log-normal  approximation  of  the  distribution  bymass in logarithmic scale.  We generate particles withsizes distributed within a cut  window shown in gray.The window is a symmetrical window in logarithmicscale around the mean value. The cut window can bedescribed by the ratio between the maximum grain sizeand minimum grain size. We used 1.5x, 2x, 3x, 4x, 5x,and 6x wide windows to study how particle size distribution affects the access of the solar wind.Using a wider window is computationally too demanding for the DEM model as a difference of six inwindow size leads to 216 difference in volume betweenthe largest and the smallest possible grain.There are two issues that emerged during the simulations.  First,  to  make  a  reasonable  comparison  between different grain ensembles, one needs to controlporosity. Second, the regolith bed created during settlement of DEM particles is uneven and one needs to define the surface topography to determine the distancethat a proton travels into the regolith.Figure 1 JSC1a Particle size distribution by mass(red) in log scale. Gray area shows a window cut that isused to generate grains particles (gray, semi-transparent) and protons (red) before and after the simulation.We generated  regolith  particle  beds  for  differentPSDs using different cut window sizes with porositiesbetween 0.52 and 0.53. The zero level for the depth iscalculated  from  an  enveloping  surface  around  thegrains as shown in Fig. 2.Figure 2 Zero level surface.After  the  regolith  grains  are  settled,  the  protons,represented by point particles of infinitely small size,are generated randomly above the regolith bed.   Theprotons  are  fired  with  constant  velocity  into  the  regolith. The angle of incidence   is varied to find thedependence of the penetration depth with incidence angle. As soon as a proton hits a regolith particle, it stops.After all protons stop, they are counted and the distribution function of  protons is  built  depending on thedepth  measured  in  mean  size  of  the  particles.   Themaximum of the distribution function is assigned to thesurface level.Results:  We run a series of cases using solar windincidence  angles  (calculated  from the  normal  to  the2934.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
surface) of 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 degrees. An exampleof the results is shown in Fig. 3. Figure 3 Proton implantation rate depending on incidence angle for 0.52-0.53 porosity and 6x cut window. The depth is measured by mean particle size D.The implantation rate curve shows how many protons  can  go  at  the  certain  depth  measured  by meangrain size D. First solar wind particles hit the top of theupper grains and the maximum number of particles hitat about 1D distance from the surface.To compare the results we use the depth that 1% ofthe solar wind protons pass e.g. 1% of all implantedprotons go deeper than this depth. The results are summarized in Fig. 4.Figure 4 The level passed by 1% of protons duringthe implantation for different incidence angles and different  PSD  cut  window. The  depth  is  measured  bymean particle size D.Increasing the grain size variation also increases theaccess of solar wind into the regolith if the porosity ofthe  regolith  is  the  same.  Most  of  the  protons  travellonger distances around large particles and thus reachlarger depth in spite of using a wider PSD cut window,which allows smaller particles into the regolith.The results show that  the protons can travel  longdistances  into the regolith and provide  the source  ofvolatiles in its upper layer.Acknowledgement:  This  work  (publicationSSERVI-2014-289) was directly supported by NASA’sSolar System Exploration Research Virtual Institute.References: [1] Kulchitsky, A. V., D. M. Hurley, J. B. Johnson,and P. Duvoy. "Effect of Porosity on Access of SolarWind to Lunar Regolith." In Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, vol. 46, p. 2649. 2015.[2] Nye, B.,  Kulchitsky, A. V. and Johnson, J.  B.(2014),  Intersecting dilated convex polyhedra methodfor  modeling  complex  particles  in  discrete  elementmethod. Int. J. Numer. Anal. Meth. Geomech., 38: 978–990. doi: 10.1002/nag.2299[3] Zeng,  X.,  He,  C.,  Oravec,  H.,  Wilkinson,  A.,Agui, J., & Asnani, V. (2009). Geotechnical propertiesof  JSC-1A lunar  soil  simulant. Journal  of  AerospaceEngineering, 23(2), 111-116.2934.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
