2958.PDF
MYSTERIOUS LINEAR VIRGAE ACROSS THE ICY SATELLITES.  E. S. Martin1, D. A. Patthoff2, T. R. Watters1, 1Center for Earth and Planetary Studies, National Air & Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC 20560 (martines@si.edu), 2Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA.  Introduction:  Mysterious linear features (hereafter referred to as linear virgae) appear to be ubiquitous across the outer solar system's icy satellites and have not been explored in detail. Virgae as described on Titan (Fig. 1) are long (100s of km), linear, slightly darker than surrounding terrains, and may exhibit sharp angles along their trace [1]. Titan's virgae may be tectonic, but also may be wind-streaks or possible deposits from flood-outflow [2]. Virgae observed on Titan are seen in Cassini VIMS, ISS, and RADAR images [2]. Here we explore virgae across multiple other icy satellites.    Figure 1: A sample of Titan's virgae centered at 120°E from Cassini VIMS. Modified from [1].   Figure 2: Linear virgae on Dione. Dione has the most known linear virgae of any of the icy bodies. A) global view showing general east-west trend. Basemap: NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute. B) red arrows show linear virgae in high resolution images.   Observations:  Linear virgae were first observed on Dione [3]. They are generally found to be bright, parallel, and widely distributed across the equatorial regions (Fig. 2). On Rhea and Enceladus, we identify additional linear features with uniform and continuous traces that are stratigraphically young, crosscutting intersecting features (Fig. 2 & 3). On most icy satellites, linear virgae appear brighter than the surrounding terrains. However, on Enceladus, the lone linear virgae appears dark.    Figure 3: Linear virgae on Rhea and Enceladus. a) Rhea, Image No. PIA12768. b) Enceladus, image from USGS basemap. Red arrows point to linear virgae.  We explore the processes known to create linear features that can reach lengths of 100s of km and maintain a relatively uniform width. We consider crater rays, boulder tracks, and impact driven tectonics, A B 25 km A B 2958.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
as possible mechanisms to create  these mysterious features.  Crater Rays: The distrubion of linear virgae on Dione (Fig. 2a) are uncharacteristic of formation due to impacts, which can produce a radial distribution of rays (Fig. 4) rather than a series of roughly east-west parallel lines. Additionally, the morphology of linear virgae are significantly less diffuse than crater rays (Fig. 4). The relative paucity of linear virgae on Rhea and Enceladus suggests an alternative formation mechanism given the large number of craters observed on both moons. Additionally, their distribution does not reflect what is expected for an impact as the linear virgae of Rhea, Enceladus, or Dione, can not be traced to any impacts.   Figure 4: The rays of Mercury's Kuiper crater at different scales. Image No. PIA11355.   Boulder Tracks: Some long, linear grooves appear on the surface of bodies like Phobos (Fig. 5), which have been attributed to rolling boulders [4]. In addition to forming proximal to Sticnkey crater, boulder tracks also have a topographic expression as evidence by a shadow, and a distinctly scalloped morphology along their trace. Boulder tracks are also shorter (10s of km) than observed linear virgae.  Impact Driven Tectonics: Similar to boulder tracks, impact driven tectonics appear as linear features with a trough-like morphology, like those on the surface of Vesta (Fig. 6). Impact driven tectonics may be radial or concentric to a crater or basin; on Vesta, impact driven tectonics are concentric to either the Rheasilvia or Veneneia impact basin [5] indicative of a genetic relationship between linear features and basins.  Discussion: There are a variety of processes that can create long, linear features across a planetary body, but none that produce the unique morphology and distribution of linear virgae observed on the icy satellites.  Distribution: Boulder tracks, crater rays, and impact driven tectonics will form radial and/or concentric around a source. These types of distributions are not consistent with observations of linear virgae in the outer solar system.   Diffusivity: Linear virgae are discreet lines that extend for 100s of km. Close observations of crater rays show them to be very diffuse, making them morphologically inconsistent with linear virgae. Linear virgae are likely not related to material expelled from an impact event.  Topographic expression: It is possible that the topographic expression expressed by linear virgae is not sufficiently pronounced to be observed at the available resolutions. Trough-like depressions left by boulder tracks and impact driven tectonics make these unlikely mechanism for formation of linear virgae.   Figure 5: Grooves on Phobos. Image No. PIA10367.   Figure 6: Impact driven tectonics on Vesta. Image No. PIA14322.  Future Work:  We continue to explore images within the PDS archive <1 km/pixel for examples of linear virgae on icy bodies. An understanding of the characteristic and spatial distribution of linear virgae on solar system bodies will help  to elucidate the mechanism(s) by which they form. References: [1] Cook et al., (2014) Titan Through Time Workshop 3. [2] Cook et al., (2012) 43rd LPSC, Abs #2484. [3] Martin et al., (2015) Geolg. Soc. Am.. Vol. 47, No. 7, p.857. [4] Wilson & Head, (2015) Icarus, 105, 26-42. [5] Buczkowski et al., (2012) GRL, 39, L18205. 2958.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
