2974.PDF
SEARCHING FOR STRUCTURE IN THE RINGS OF SATURN K.-M. Aye, L. W. Esposito, LASP, University ofColorado, 3665 Discovery Drive, Boulder, CO, USA (michael.aye@lasp.colorado.edu)Introduction Data from the Cassini mission haveshown that the rings of Saturn are much more dynamicin their behavior than it was known after the Voyagerobservations. While Saturn’s tidal force and collisionslimit accretion [1], occultation profiles of the edges ofthe rings from Cassini’s UVIS instrument show widevariability, indicating perturbations by local mass aggregations. The timescales for aggregation and disaggregation inferred by observations range from hoursto months and this collective behavior of the ring particles can be described by a mass-based predator-preysystem as described in [2]. We present a study testingout several signal processing methods for identifying oscillations near the strongest spiral density waves that fiteither the description of straw-like features as identifiedin [3] or that of Lindblad resonances as investigated byour group in [4].Data In the current work, image data from the Saturn orbit injection (SOI) phase of Cassini’s Imaging Science Subsystem (ISS) are being analyzed. These datahave some of the highest resolution for Saturn rings ofthe Cassini mission. A calibration and filtering pipelinebased on the Integrated Software for Imagers and Spectrometers (ISIS) software toolkit of the United StatesGeological Survey (USGS) has been set up and published as an open source Python-based library called“pyciss” [5].Part of this pipeline is projecting the ring data intoa Saturn-centered cylindrical coordinate system (seeFig. 2) based on the navigation data of the Cassini spacecraft as recorded by SPICE kernels of NASA’s NAIFgroup. The advantage of projecting the images intoa cylindrical coordinate system is that the azimuthallysymmetric structure of the rings are stored as parallelfeatures that can easily be integrated for better signal tonoise ratios of any feature being studied.Method 1: Measure of azimuthal dispersionalong radius With this method we want to test the hypothesis that clumping in the rings can be identified bychanges in the statistical dispersion of the photo-metricsignal in ISS images along the azimuth when comparedat different radii of the rings. Because some of the pixelsof the ISS CCD are prone to be outliers even after applying the calibration routine of ISIS (“CISSCAL 3.6”),a simple standard deviation per radius row of the CCDarray could be heavily biased by these outliers.We therefore apply a more robust median-basedvariance measure of dispersion called “median absolutedeviation” (MAD), which is defined as the median ofthe absolute deviations from the data’s median, i.e.MAD = mediani (Xi −medianj (Xj) ) (1)with X1, X2, . . . , Xn a uni-variate data set. The MADvalue has therefore a similar relationship to the medianvalue as the standard deviation has to the mean; it alsohas previously been applied to gray-scale and color image analysis before, e.g. in [6]. Figure 2 shows theFigure 1: A very preliminary wavelet analysis on the2 image rows with minimum and maximum statisticaldispersion along the ring azimuth, as identified per theright-hand side of Figure 2. The powers and x-axis values are arbitrary in value at this point, but the scale atwhich a power is drawn relates to the x-axis as 1/pixelsize. A potentially significant difference in the powerdistribution can be noted.result of applying the MAD estimator to an SOI imagewith a strong spiral density wave signature. In general,the row-based dispersion increases at the location of themost intense density waves. A zoomed-in view reveals2974.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
Figure 2: Applying the robust dispersion estimator “median absolute deviation” to each row of the cylindricallyprojected ring image. The values of the MAD estimator are drawn — arbitrarily shifted above the image for comparison — as red scatter points with lower values towards the left. A general increase of variance at the location of thebiggest spiral density waves is visible, centered around radius 132.37 Mm. The right-hand plot shows a zoom-in thatreveals that the dispersion is asymmetrically distributed around the crests of the density wave. The data was taken on2004-07-01T03:46, with an emission angle of approx. 117◦ (with values larger than 90 indicating an observation ofthe un–lit side of the rings).however, that the values of dispersion are asymmetrically distributed around the crests of the density waves(with the crests being the dark parts of the image, due toobserved extinction on the un-lit side of the rings in thisdata). Starting from the inner edge of a density wave,the crest of the density wave (crests are dark on the unlit side of the rings due to the increased extinction) firstshows a local minimum of dispersion. Then a local maximum after the crest shows up, followed by average values and finally the largest values of dispersion per density wave appearing right before the next crest. Thispattern is visible over several waves.Status: At this stage we can state that this patternhas been found with several SOI images. Prior to theLPSC conference we will cross-check the locations ofthese events against the known Lindblad resonance locations. It should be noted that the signature of “straw”like structure shows a collective approximately similarorientation of elongated elements that could not easilybe identified using this method. However, currently ongoing studies of very high resolution UVIS occultationdata [7] finds oscillatory signatures near spiral densitywave crests as wellMethod 2: Wavelet analysis As discussed in [8], aclassical windowed Fourier transform represents an inaccurate and inefficient method of time-frequency localization, as it imposes a scale or response interval T intothe analysis. For analyses where a predetermined scaling may not be appropriate because of a wide range ofdominant frequencies, a method of timefrequency localization that is scale independent, such as wavelet analysis, should be employed [8]. Figure 1 shows a verypreliminary example of applying a wavelet analysis tothe previously identified interesting rows of minimumand maximum statistical dispersion rows in Figure 2.Status The azimuthal pixel resolutions need to beworked out for the wavelet analysis so that one can makea statement on the power that is existent in what lengthscale. We will show further progress for this at the conference.Method 3: Sinusoidal fits We will follow up another hypothesis before the conference: the fitting of sinusoidal functions to each row of the cylindrically projected ring data should have smaller residuals where oscillations caused by moons or clumping appear in thephotometric data.References: [1] Karjalainen, R and Salo, H. Icarus,172:328–348 (2004). [2] Esposito, LW et al. [3] Porco,CC et al. Science, 307:1226–1236 (2005).[4] Rehnberg, M et al. AAS, 47:#104.04 (2015).[5] Aye, KM. pyciss (2015).doi:10.5281/zenodo.34134. [6] Khalil, HH et al.[7] Brown, Z et al. AAS/DPS Meeting Abstracts (2015).[8] Torrence, C and Compo, GP. Bulletin of theAmerican Meteorological Society, 79:61–78 (1998).2974.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
