2975.PDF
BOUNDING THE VALIDITY OF NIGHTSIDE TIME DOMAIN ELECTROMAGNETIC SOUNDING OF THE MOON. H.A. Fuqua1,2, S. Fatemi1, G.T. Delory1, I. de Pater2, R.E. Grimm3. 1Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, (heidi.fuqua@ssl.berkeley.edu), 2Department of Earth & Planetary Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 3Department of Space Studies, Southwest Research Institute, 1050 Walnut St. #300, Boulder, CO 80302.  Introduction: Time varying magnetic fields passing through conductive media induce eddy currents. Electromagnetic (EM) Sounding uses induced magnetic fields to remotely deduce material properties at depth. The first step of performing EM Sounding at the Moon is to understand the dynamic plasma environment, and to be able find a plasma regime which enables geophysical induced currents to be isolated. Time Domain Electromagnetic (TDEM) Sounding transfer function method requires a two-point measurement: one of the background Solar Wind (SW), and one near the Moon. This method was performed during Apollo assuming the induced fields on the nightside of the Moon expand as in an undisturbed vacuum within the wake cavity, bounded by a region ±77o of the antisubsolar point [1]. TDEM sounding is particularly well suited for measurements from moving satellite platforms accounting for changing altitudes. This work is in support of TDEM Sounding with ARTEMIS, two twin satellites currently orbiting the Moon [2]. We have studied the influence of the wake fields on a dipolar field placed at the center of the Moon representative of the induced field. Here we see the induced fields are disturbed but not confined by the wake currents [3]. However, the Apollo work [1] was criticized for not taking into account the asymmetric confinement of the induced field by the wake cavity [4]. Here we summarize the underlying trends seen in our models and discuss their implications on the validity of TDEM Sounding vacuum theory for the nightside wake region. Summary of Plasma Hybrid Models: We have considered 13 different bounding configurations for the upstream plasma conditions varying the orientation of Interplanetary Magnetic Field (IMF) to the free streaming solar wind and magnetic moment (m). The cases considered include parallel and perpendicular IMF to SW. We varied the orientation of the magnetic moment from perpendicular and parallel to the SW, 45o, aligned with the IMF, and opposing the IMF. We have considered the effects of high and low dynamic pressure, and varied the magnitude of the magnetic moment. In each case, we modeled the pristine wake fields (Bw) and followed with the same configuration with a magnetic moment in the Moon (Bf). We use a righthanded coordinate system centered at the Moon, with the +X axis directed toward the Sun. Here the solar wind flows along the -X axis, and the IMF is in the XY plane. The simulation cell size is 108km, and the lunar radius is RL=1728 km. Subtracting Bw from Bf  yields residuals which are the disturbed dipole fields (Figure 1 top). Continuing to subtract the undisturbed dipolar field (Bdip) yield residual fields that are the disturbed fields only (Figure 1 bottom). Regions of minimal disturbance (indicated by blue color) include areas where the TDEM vacuum theory is valid. Thus Figure 1 becomes a spatial validity map for TDEM Sounding vacuum theory, for cases matching these upstream SW conditions. Figure 2 shows these same fields at four counter clockwise (180o is antisubsolar point within deep wake cavity) circular paths at varying altitudes. Here we note minimally disturbed fields remain within ±50o and under 200km altitude. This is one example from the 13 cases considered thus far.                           Figure 1. Hybrid model showing the distortion of a dipolar field within the lunar wake. IMF is perpendicular and the moment is parallel to SW with a magnitude of 1e16 Am2. (Top) Shows disturbed dipole fields, (Bottom) shows disturbed fields only. Regions of minimal disturbance are blue in color.  2975.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
 Figure 2. Same model from Figure 1, showing at four altitudes a counter clockwise circular orbit around the Moon, which yield highly disturbed fields outside ±50o from the antisubsolar point (180o).  Figure 3 summarizes the regions of minimum disturbance, defined by a horizontal longitude window and amplitude of disturbed fields normalized to dipole fields, in each of the 13 cases. Disturbances above 30% are disregarded as highly disturbed. In all cases, some zone of minimal disturbance exists for altitudes less than 200km at the antisubsolar point. This region varies between ±30o and ±50o at the lunar surface depending on SW configuration and narrows with altitude. Thus, TDEM vacuum approximation is valid for the nightside cavity at the antisubsolar point. However, the original bounds used by [1] were too large.     Figure 3. Summary of plasma hybrid models highlighting trends locating the minimal disturbance region. Longitude breadth is center at antisubsolar point (100o corresponds to a window of ±50o). Amplitude corresponds to lowest value reached within orbit.  With these hybrid models, upstream conditions allow an accurate assessment of the amount of distortion induced fields will encounter due to wake current systems and the locations of minimal disturbance. We have found low dynamic pressure and large magnetic moment (above 1e16 Am2) act to favorably increase the window of minimal disturbance. Although there is a saturation reached where the window is not changed significantly between 1e16 Am2 and 1e17 Am2. The surface generally includes a larger minimal disturbance region; however, in several cases, the least disturbed case occurred at 100 or 200km altitude and not at the surface. We conclude that the TDEM vacuum approximation is valid for some regions close to the antisubsolar point and generally under 300km altitude. Low dynamic pressure and higher induced magnetic moments will act to increase this window of validity.  References: [1] P. Dyal and C.W. Parkin (1971) JGR, 76(25), 5947-5969. [2] Angelopoulos (2011) Space Sci. Rev. 165(1), 3-25. [3] Fatemi et al. (2015) GRL, 42, 6931-6938. [4] Schubert et al. (1973) JGR, 78(19), 3688-3696. 2975.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
