2976.PDF
SYNCOMPRESSIONAL SHEAR MEASUREMENTS IN OBLIQUE IMPACT EXPERIMENTS.  J. M. Dahl1 and P. H. Schultz2, 1Brown University DEEPS, Campus Box 1846, Providence, RI 02912, Jason_Dahl@Brown.edu, 2Brown University DEEPS, Campus Box 1846, Providence, RI 02912, Peter_Schultz@Brown.edu.   Introduction:  While craters from vertical impacts tend to be roughly axisymmetric, craters from oblique impacts exhibit significant structural asymmetries, both at planetary scales [1] and in impact experiments [2]. Such asymmetries reflect directional effects of the shock and the pervasive shear that develops as a result. Changing ejecta trajectories, for example, indicate a moving, changing shock source in oblique impacts [3, 4]. Such a source may generate significant lateral shear waves, and in fact, asymmetries in shear-dominated failure are apparent in both impact experiments and in numerical models that account for both impact angle and shear strength of target materials [5, 6]. While there have been few actual measurements of shear strain resulting from experimental impacts, a previous study showed that transverse shear waves do occur [7]. Here, we report results from a series of impact experiments that further document horizontally-polarized shear waves resulting from oblique impacts, which reveal the nature of shear motions induced during early phases of projectile-target coupling, and which in turn influence both near-impact shear failure and can serve as input functions for far-field seismic motions [e.g. 8].       Experiments:  Impact generated shear deformation experiments were conducted in PMMA targets at the Ames Vertical Gun Range.  Impact velocities ranged from 2.5-5.5 km/s, and impact angles were 90°, 30°, or 15°.  Sensor arrays consisting of a pair of orthogonal strain sensors were placed slightly below the surface, lateral to the impact trajectory for oblique impacts, with the "point" of each sensor pair pointed toward the impact (Figure 1).  In this configuration, the sensor pair forms a miniature shear strain meter.  This arrangement is analogous to a Benioff-type strain seismograph (at much larger scales) [9]. Changes in sensor lengths resulted in resistance changes within the sensor elements, and consequently, changes in voltage across each element that were calibrated to yield strain records for each sensor. Assuming a roughly constant distance between the distal ends of the sensors, the differential sensor strains were used to solve for the alongtrajectory ("East-West") and across-trajectory ("N-S") displacement of the tip of the sensor array, relative to the tails, at each point of the record. Back-azimuths were measured from the tip of each sensor array to the point of first contact, assumed to be located near craters' uprange center of symmetry [2].  These backazimuths were used to rotate each pair of records, similar to seismic trace rotation [10], to produce records of  Figure 1: Typical target configuration (top).  Oblique impact trajectory from the left.  Orthogonal strain sensors placed lateral to impact trajectory.  Compression along the sensor array axis results in shortening of both sensor elements (bottom) while shear results in differential element strains.  motion radial to and transverse to the initial impact point.             Results and Discussion: Figure 2 shows typical radial and transverse displacements from an oblique impact.  Arrival of the main shock ("p-wave") is marked by strong outward motion followed by inward partial release.  This is often followed by a distinct recompression, consistent with the reimpact and ricochet of the decapitated projectile downrange of the initial impact point [6].  At later times, radial motions become complex.  In contrast, initial transverse motions in rotated traces tend to be small, and reach their maximum amplitudes several microseconds behind the main shock. These small initial transverse motions are also consistent with initial motion directly away from an upange center of symmetry [2]. Most traces from oblique impacts also show distinct signals near the expected arrival times for waves originating at the impact point and traveling at s-wave and surface wave speeds.  Unfortunately, recognition these arrivals is complicated by the potential arrival of reflections from the target bottom and sides, which may interfere with true swaves and surface waves in this study.  These "seis2976.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
mic" wave arrivals will be the subject of further experiments.       Ratios of s-wave to p-wave amplitudes [11] and P/S spectral amplitudes [12] have been used to discriminate between the seismic signatures of earthquakes and explosions.  Ratios of transverse to radial peak displacements during p-wave passage in these experiments (Figure 3A) do not show distinct differences between for different impact angles as a function of impact velocity.  On the other hand, transverse and radial spectral displacement amplitude ratios are surprisingly similar for 30° and 90° impacts.  Furthermore, the relative strength of transverse motions scales with impact speed, with At/Ar ~ V-1.08.   This contrasts with other measures of impact such as peak stress, which scale with the vertical component of impact speed.  Moreover, some 15° impacts generate anomalously strong transverse motions, with spectral amplitude ratios 2-3x  those from less oblique impacts at similar velocities. Consequently, oblique impacts appear to generate larger shear strains at a given stress level (for example), contributing to the greater prevalence of shear damage observed around oblique impacts [5, 6] .  Furthermore, thease early-time transverse displacements serve as input functions for seismic responses at greater distances and later times, and may affect the discrimination of oblique impacts from explosions or planetary seismicity.      Figure 2: Radial (blue, positive outward) and transverse (red, positive uprange) displacementsfrom oblique impact at 15° (from horizontal) and 4 km/s.  Approx. time of impact = 60 s (arbitrary zero).  Shock pulse ("p-wave") arrives at 77 s. Also shown are predicted arrival times for phases traveling at s-wave (S) and surface wave (L) speeds, as well as the earliest predicted reflection arrivals from the bottom and sides of the target. Maximum radial and transverse displacements (Aradial & Atrans.) are measured prior to the potential arrival of any later phases or reflections.     Figure 3: A) Ratios of peak transverse (At) to peak radial (Ar) displacement during passage of the p-wave. B) Ratios of p-wave peak transverse and radial spectral amplitudes. Spectral amplitudes calculated using a Fast Fourier Transform over a window starting at the first shock arrival, and ending just prior to the arrival of any potential later phase or reflection.  References: [1] Schultz P. H. (1992) JGR Planets, 97, 11623-11662. [2] Schultz P. H. and Anderson R. A. (1996) GSA Special Paper 302, 397-417. [3] Anderson J. L. and Schultz P. H. (2006) Int. J. Imp. Eng., 33, 35-44. [4] Schultz P. H. et al. (2009) LPS XL, Abstract #2496. [5] Stickle A. M. et al. (2009) LPS XL, Abstract #2357. [6] Stickle A. M. and Schultz P. H. (2011) Int. J. Imp. Eng.,38, 527-534. [7] Dahl J. M. and Schultz P. H. (2001) LPS XXXII, Abstract #1429. [8] Richardson J. E. et al. (2005) Icarus, 179, 325-349. [9] Benioff H. and Gutenberg B. (1952) Bull. Seis. Soc. Am., 42, 229-237. [10] Hermann R. B. (1975) Seis. Res. Lett., 10, 29-39. [11] Walter W. R. et al.(2007) 29th Monitoring Res. Rev., 685-693. [12] Kim  W. Y. and Simpson, D. W. (1993) GRL, 20, 1507-1510.  A  B  2976.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
