 Ertel Potential Vorticity of the Mars Polar Vortex from MGS-TES and MRO-MCS temperature soundings.  T. H. McConnochie1, A. D. Toigo2, S. D. Guzewich3 and A. Kleinboehl4, 1University of Maryland Deparment of Astronomy, College Park, MD 20742, 2Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins, Laurel, MD 3NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD 4NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA,   Introduction:  This presentation explores the accuracy and implications of Ertel potential vorticity derived from temperature soundings in the Martian winter polar regions. The goal of this type of analysis is to understand the dynamics of the polar vortices, which seem to be present in some form in essentially all planetary atmospheres and which are critical to the Martian climate system because they represent a barrier to transport surrounding the winter pole. Ertel potential vorticity is a key quantity for understanding polar vortices because it is a conserved dynamial tracer in adiabatic or approximately adiabatic conditions and with realistic (for Earth and we hypothesize for Mars) assumptions it can capture the key features of a complicated 3-component 3-dimensional wind field in a single 2-dimensional scalar [1]. On Earth it's distribution is well correlated with chemical tracers such as, most famously, ozone and ozone-depleting chlorine radicals [2]. It is also significant that atmospheric circulation is dominated by the largest-scale Ertel PV features which means that we can be reasonably confident of resolving the most important features even with limitedresolution models and obserations. [1]  Recent work, e.g. [3,4] on the Mars polar vortices has relied on GCMs and data assimilations of MGSTES temperature soundings to calculate Ertel PV and to describe the polar vortex dynamics. The data assimilations incorporate temperature sounding information into an underlying GCM to produce what is termed a "re-analysis" of the atmospheric state. This produces a depiction of Ertel PV that is consistent with the temperatures soundings (given an assumed error covariance matrix for those soundings) and with a detailed description of atmospheric dynamics inherent to the GCM, but which is still very much influenced by the limitations and assumptions of that GCM. An alternative and complementary approach is to calculate winds and then Ertel PV directly from the temperature sounding without involving a GCM at all. This eliminates the possibility that the polar features we observe are properties of the GCM rather than the real atmosphere, but it requirements significant simplyfying assumptions about atmospheric dynamics. The set of assumptions that we explore here is the balance-winds approximation, which assumes that eulerian time derivatives (i.e. partial derivates with respect to time) and vertical wind compoments are small relative to the horizontal flow. It is essentially a generalization of geostrophic balance and it has been shown to work well for calculating winds in the Earth's stratosphere [5]. It is also particularly well suited to the studying Ertel PV because when the balance wind approximation is valid the Ertel PV field can be inverted to obtain the wind vector field, meaning that Ertel PV captures the essential features of the dynamical state of the atmosphere. Thus the assumptions that we are applying to obtain Ertel PV are the same as the assumptions that make Ertel PV most interesting.  Methodology:  To evaluate balance-winds-derived Ertel PV, we calculate it from TES nadir-viewing temperature retrievals, and from Mars Climate Sounder (MCS) 2-dimensional retrievals, and finally we perform the same balance-winds process on GCM-modelderived temperature fields as a critical test of the balance winds assumptions. The 2-d version of the MCS retrievals, presented by [6], is critical because the limb sounding geometry of MCS samples a swath of atmosphere that spans several degrees of latitude and over which temperature can vary significantly in the vicinity of the polar front and polar vortex. The balance-wind method we use here is an improved version of that applied by [7] The balance wind method starts with interpolating the temperature soundings onto a uniform longitudelatitude-altitude-time grid, with altitude measured in terms of log-pressure. We interpolate linearly and interpolate in one dimension at a time - first latitude, then longitude, and finally we interpolate in time. The vertical levels are established by the original temperature sounding data sets. We chose an arbitrary lowlevel pressure level as the zero point for geopotential height and the calculate geopoential height from hydrostatic equilibrium. We then iteratively solve for the wind field, seeking an approximate solution to the full primitive equations for zonal and meridional momentum balance, neglecting only the local time derivatives and the vertical wind components. Ertel PV is then calculated from the wind and temperature field, making the same simplifications as in the primitive equations (i.e. hydrostatic balance and a thin-shell atmosphere). When applying this method to model temperature fields the objective is to find out if we can reproduce the model winds and model derived Ertel PV and thus determine whether the balance wind approximation is sufficiently accurate. We do this from two different  starting points: first by starting with the uniform grid established by the model; second tby sampling the model temperature grid in a manner equivalent to the spacecraft observing patterns and then sending this artificial sampling through our complete interpolation process to yield an end-to-end test.  Preliminary results: The original version of our balance-wind derived Ertel PV fields, as presented in [7] turns out to share a variety of features in common with the recent re-analysis based Ertel PV presented in [3]. In particular both versions of Ertel PV show persistent annular PV field at the northern winter pole. An Ertel PV latitudinal gradient that changes sign is expected to be dynamically unstable and its presence as a persistent feature is suprising. The fact that both the reanalysis and the balance wind approach to estimating Ertel PV produce this feature greatly improves our confidence that it is a real feature in the atmosphere. It also indicates that the balance-wind approach is at least approximately consistent with much more detailed representation of atmospheric dynamics used by the reanalysis. We of course might still be concerned that this annular PV field is an artifact of the TES temperature data set - that is why repeating the Ertel PV derivation on the MCS temperature data set is critical. A more detailed preliminary example of a good match between two approaches to Ertel PV is found by examining the effects of a Mars Year 26 dust event at Ls = ~ 320 on the norther polar PV field. Both approach yield similarly shaped high-Ertel-PV annuli and similar dramatic displacements of the annulus by the dust event at the same time.  References: [1] Hoskins B. J. (1985) Q. J. R. Met. Soc. 111, 877. [2] Schoeberl M. R. and Hartmann, D. L. (1991) Science 251, 46-52. [3] Mitchell D. M. et al. (2014) Q. J. R. Met. Soc. 141, 550-562. [4] Toigo A. D. et al. (2015) AGU Fall Meeting P23B-2128. [5] Randel W. J. (1987) J. Atmos. Sci, 44 3097-3120. [6] Kleinbohl A. et al. (2014) AGU Fall Meeting P45A02. [7] McConnochie T. H. (2007) PhD. Thesis.  