 PRECISE IGNEOUS CRYSTALLIZATION AGES FOR FERROAN ANORTHOSITES: MERELY DIFFICULT, OR IMPOSSIBLE?  Paul H. Warren1 and Patrick Boehnke1, 1Department of Earth, Planetary & Space Sciences, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1567, USA; pwarren@ucla.edu.   Introduction: Most nonmare lunar rocks are obviously polymict if not impact-melted. For constraining the how and when of early lunar crustal genesis, we must look to the small minority of "pristine" nonmare rocks; i.e., fragments that survived the exogenic jumbling and impact melting of the early crust without significant compositional modification [1]. However, that concept of "significant" modification becomes problematic as technology empowers us to study these rocks in greater and greater detail. A composition "pristine" for purposes of mineral-chemical intercomparison [1] might not be adequately "pristine" for purposes of highest-precision isotopic geochronology. Among the few relatively well-sampled (mass >>1 gram) nominally pristine nonmare rocks, the only ones that have modal composition (plag abundance) consistent with flotation over a primordial magma ocean are the distinctive ferroan anorthosites (FA) [1,2]. As reviewed by Borg et al. [3,4], decades of painstaking work on FA samples have yielded five precise (2-σ uncertainty ≤ 85 Ma) isochron ages using the refractory Sm-Nd system (and also one notably precise Pb-Pb result of 4359 ± 2.4 Ma). The oldest of the Sm-Nd results is 4438 ± 34 Ma — ancient, yet significantly young in comparison to expectations for magma ocean flotation cumulate genesis, and even suggestively young in comparison to a few dense (plag-poor) magnesian cumulates that presumably post-date the magma ocean. If none of the FA are old enough to have formed as magma ocean products, the implication would be that available samples include zero survivors from a cumulate flotation crust; and the whole magma ocean hypothesis, and/or the timing of lunar giant-impact origin, might require reassessment [3]. This concern is linked to the conventional, facile assumption that SmNd ages precisely record the time of igneous crystallization. But for lunar materials as ancient and impactbattered as FA, is that assumption really valid? FA petrology:  An early near-synonym for FA was "cataclastic anorthosite". All of the age-dated FA are breccias. As nominally pristine rocks, all of them are, or at least appear to be, monomict. However, it does not necessarily follow that these materials entirely avoided postigneous compositional modification. Until recently, most interpretations of FA assumed that lunar interior rocks evolved in near-total isolation from exposure to volatile-rich fluids. A wide array of recent work [stemming from 5] has shown that actually the Moon's interior is far from completely dry. Thus, the potential for subtle yet significant postigneous alteration is vastly greater than it once seemed. Even 33 years ago, Nord [6] described, unfortunately only in brief abstract format, mineral-chemical complexities indicating that postigneous alterations are common within FA. Nord reported widespread instances of spatial-compositional complexity in plag, sometimes associated not simply with grain rims (reverse zoning) but with twin boundaries and "low-angle subboundaries"; i.e., apparent "conduits for diffusion". Nord cautioned, "Any use of compositional trends in evaluating the crystallization history of the] anorthosites must be carefully examined." We have been studying some of the same samples used by Nord [6]. We expect to acquire more data before March, but thus far our findings include an anomaly that may be linked with a subboundary in 62236 (one of the Sm-Nd samples), and an impressive instance of abrupt reverse zoning (An98.1 in a discrete lobe at the rim of an otherwise An95.5-96.5 grain) in 62255. Alteration within this lobe is also evident in optical microscopy, as fading-out of twin lamellae. The altered compositions show normal plag stoichiometry. These observable late alterations of plag were probably accompanied by at least subtle alterations of the other major minerals. Alterations of such subtlety might have little impact on Sm-Nd ages at a level of precision of order 100 Ma, but for endeavors to pinpoint igneous crystallization down to a few tens of Ma or less, even subtle effects may become significant. Sm-Nd closure modeling:  Even in the absence of such observed complexities, it would be questionable whether Sm-Nd closure came precisely at the end of igneous crystallization in these rocks. The timing of the earliest lunar crustal brecciation (impact cratering) is key for interpretation of ancient Sm-Nd results, and we have no reason to be confident that brecciation, or at least exposure to significant impact shocks, did not commence almost as soon as the earliest lunar crust formed. Brecciation and shock are important in part because chemical modification is greatly accelerated within a shocked/brecciated solid. Not only is a brecciated material more susceptible to fluid alteration (cf. previous section). A brecciated material also may continue to equilibrate down to significantly lower closure temperature [7] than would an intact solid material in which the original igneous grain size corresponds to the intrasolid diffusion domain size. A distribution of grain and subgrain sizes can be calculated from 39Ar  diffusion data acquired through non-monotonic stepheating analysis of an Apollo 16 ferroan anorthosite [8]. This size distribution can be used to calculate closure temperatures for the Sm-Nd system in order to assess the significance of the likely slow cooling that these samples experienced. The importance of a lower closure T is magnified by another by-product of the generic breciation of the early lunar crust. Due to the scarcity of fluid in the upper few kilometers of the lunar crust (what little fluid arises here is quickly lost by upward migration as a consequence of widespread brecciation plus the fluid's low density as determined by the Moon's low crustal pressure), brecciation porosity here is almost entirely vacuous porosity. Vacously porous materials make very effective thermal insulators. Lunar breccias average about 17% porosity (cf. the constraints from GRAIL [9]), and in consequence the Moon's megaregolith only conducts heat at about 1/10 the rate it would if it were solid [10]. Assuming this approximate porosity was engendered in the upper few kilometers by widespread cratering already as the magma ocean's flotation crust went through the early stages of cooling (a proposition we cannot prove but which appears at least strongly possible), the cooling of all deeper levels of the crust would have been commensurately prolonged. This is significant in part because like faster effective chemical diffusion, slower cooling has the effect of lowering closure temperature [7]. Three of effects brecciation, small-scale and global, come into play: Enhanced effective chemical diffusion and slower cooling within a putative mid-crustal early cumulate rock both result in a relatively low Tclosure. Meanwhile, slower global crustal cooling also has a direct impact on the duration of cooling to any given Tclosure. When all of these effects are modeled, using the approach of [10] and the lastest diffusion coefficients [e.g., 11], we find that early development of a brecciated megaregolith would likely result in significant lags, of order 5-100 Ma, between the time of igneous crystallization and cooling to Tclosure, even for the refractory Sm-Nd system. Depth of origin/cooling becomes an important variable. Even assuming a relatively conservative model for early megaregolith porosity, two rocks formed by simultaneous igneous crystallization but at extreme-disparate depth within the earliest lunar crust might yield Sm-Nd ages "discrepant" by as much as 50 Ma. Conclusions: Age results suggest that typical ferroan anorthosites, as we find them, did not form by flotation-crystallization atop a primordial lunar magmasphere. But the basic "pristinity" of these rocks (i.e., their avoidance of gross impact-admixture effects) does not mean we can safely assume their isotopic systems closed, permanently, immediately, at completion of igneous crystallization. With age precision reaching down to <<100 Ma, results even from the Sm-Nd system, for lunar crustal rocks of near-primordial antiquity and loosely constrained depth provenance, may be better construed as lower limits for the timing of actual igneous crystallization. The lunar magma ocean hypothesis remains viable.  References: [1] Warren P. H. and Wasson J. T. (1980) in Proceedings of the Conference on the Lunar Highlands Crust (eds. R. B. Merrill & J. J. Papike), pp. 8199. [2] Warren P. H. and Taylor G. J. (2014) in Treatise on Geochemistry, Vol. 2: Planets, Asteriods, Comets and The Solar System  (A. M. Davis, ed.), pp. 213250. [3] Borg L. E. et al. (2011) Nature 477, 70-72. [4] Borg L. E. et al. (2015) Meteoritics & Planet. Sci. 50, 715-732. [5] Saal A. E. et al. (2008) Nature 454, 192-195. [6] Nord G. L., Jr. (1983) in Workshop on Pristine Highland Rocks and the Early History of the Moon (abstract, in Lunar Planet. Inst. Tech. Rpt. 8302; J. Longhi & G. Ryder, eds.), pp. 62-63. [7] Dodson M. H. (1973) Contrib. Min. Pet. 40, 259-274. [8] Boehnke P. et al. (2015) LPS XLVI, abstract #2745. [9] Wieczorek M. A. et legio (2013) Science 339, 671675. [10] Warren P. H. et al. (1991) Jour. Geophys. Res. 96, 5909-5923. [11] Cherniak D. J. and Liang Y. (2007) Geoch. Cosmoch. Acta 71, 1324-1340. 