 QUANTIFICATION OF OXYGEN ISOTOPE SIMS MATRIX EFFECTS IN OLIVINE SAMPLES: CORRELATION WITH SPUTTER RATE.  J. Isa 1, I.E. Kohl 1, J.T. Wasson 1, E.D. Young 1 and K.D. McKeegan 1. 1 Department of Earth, Planetary, and Space Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles (jisa@ucla.edu).  Introduction:  Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) is a useful technique for analyzing isotope abundances in cosmochemical and geochemical samples because of its excellent depth and surface spatial resolutions. Although SIMS can yield high precision measurements, the technique has strong instrumental biases. For example, instrumental fractionations caused by secondary ion yields depend on the target chemical composition and on the primary beam ion species; the resultant fractionations are called the "matrix effect". SIMS matrix effects on oxygen isotope ratios measured in several silicates under high-energy filtering conditions were discussed by [1, 2]. Although analysis of only high energy secondary ions can reduce matrix effects somewhat, they are not eliminated and this technique is not widely used today for high precision analyses. High-quality data corrections supported by further understanding of matrix effects are desired to meet today's need for accurate and precise data. Given that cosmochemical samples contain a wider range of FeO concentrations than do terrestrial mantle olivines, SIMS O-isotope matrix effects can be rather significant (e.g. olivine in unequilibrated chondrites: Fa0-70; typical olivine in HED: ~Fa 20-35 and its secondary olivine: Fa100; olivine in Martian meteorites: ~Fa25-50; and olivine in angrite meteorites: ~Fa10-100). Despite the fact that much effort has been spent on understanding the physical mechanisms of matrix effects, models are not robust or accurate enough to determine high quality correction algorithms for unknown samples [e.g. 3 and 4]. These past results and difficulties have motivated us to empirically investigate O-isotope matrix effects in olivines with different chemical compositions. Our goal is to derive a detailed correlation between instrumental mass fractionation and sample compositions over the entire olivine Fe-Mg solid-solution series. Furthermore, we will investigate whether matrix effects can be understood in terms of implanted Csconcentrations in the sample surface. Sample and Analytical Methods:  Seven terrestrial and two meteoritic olivine samples, with wide ranges of Fe/Mg composition - Fa values ranged from 2 to 100 including the intermediate compositions Fa34, 50 and 70 - were studied. All olivine grains were handpicked by utilizing a binocular microscope. Some SIMS samples were mounted in epoxy resin or indium while other portions of selected grains were used for laser fluorination analysis. Quantitative mineral elemental compositions were determined by use of an electron microprobe. Laser fluorination was performed and Thermo Finnigan Deltaplus gas-source isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) was used for analyzing bulk O-isotopes at the UCLA Young Stable Isotope Laboratory. SIMS analyses were performed on the UCLA 1270 ion microprobe using a primary Cs + beam and analyzing lowenergy (25eV) negative secondary ions. The measurements were carried out during three periods: in 2012, 2013 and 2014. Samples were sputtered with a primary beam of about 4 nA, 6 nA and 3 nA, respectively (by year) with impact energies of 20 keV focused to spots with a diameter in the range of 20-40 µm. A normal incident electron gun was used to compensate for possible sample charging. Oxygen isotopes 16 O and 18 O were measured simultaneously on a multi-collector system; two Faraday cups were used for the analysis. The sputtering rates for individual samples were calculated based on the depths of crater pits sputtered in a 50 µm × 50 µm raster mode with a 5 nA primary Cs + beam. Each sample was sputtered for 20 min. The crater pits depths were measured with a MicroXam interferometer. Results and Discussion:  Our data show appreciable O-isotope SIMS matrix effects that are not linearly correlated with olivine composition. O-isotope SIMS matrix effects in terms of Fe molar fractions of olivine are plotted (Fig. 1).   Fig. 1 SIMS matrix effects versus olivine composition. SIMSnSC means that SIMS 18O/16O ratios normalized to San Carlos olivine 18O/16O ratio to correct the IMF (See text for detail).   Note that we utilized San Carlos (SC-) olivine (with (δ 18 O)SMOW=5.2 ‰) to calibrate SIMS instrumental mass fractionation factor (IMF) for each analytical. That factor was applied for all isotope ratios measured by SIMS, and we denote the corrected ratios as SIMSnSC. Gas source IRMS on the other hand, does not require an instrumental mass fractionation correction due to sample standard bracketing, where both gasses are subject to the same effects. Assuming that the laser fluorination reactions went perfectly to completion and produced purified O2 gas, the gas-source instrument is free of matrix effects. Fig. 1 depicts the degree of SIMS matrix effects, i.e., the difference in mass dependent fractionation of a sample relative to that of SC-olivine, versus the chemical composition of the olivine (average Fa value). The uncertainties of the SIMS data were determined from the standard deviation of replicate analyses. The data are well fit by a quadratic curve, with the fit weighted by uncertainties on the isotope ratios only. Previous low-energy SIMS data [5] are consistent with the fit curve shown in our Fig. 1. It is important to note that the SIMS matrix effects reported here were reproducible over a 3-year span and for the different primary beam currents we have employed. This indicates that SIMS matrix effects can be corrected by using the modeled fit curve. In previous studies of high energy ions [1], linear correlations between matrix effects and Fe concentrations in olivine were observed. However, previous relationships appear quite different from our results. For the energy-filtering method while the Fe-rich end member olivine yielded strongly negative mass fractionations, the matrix effect was not constrained for intermediate olivine compositions (Fa30 - Fa95). We observed that sputtering rates are inversely and linearly correlated with the O-isotope SIMS matrix effect (Fig. 2). It is known that the inverse of the sputtering rate is proportional to the Cs concentration in the sputtering surface [6]. Therefore, our results indicate that lower Cs concentration in the sputtering surface leads to a larger matrix effect. During Cs + sputtering, Cs ions are implanted in the sample thus modifying the sample surface. Implantation of Cs in the target sample surface decreases the work-function and increases the formation probability of secondary ions [9]. Consequently, the high sputtering rates for the Fe-rich sample surface leads to decreasing ionization probabilities and a higher mass-dependent fractionation than for samples more fully saturated with Cs.  There have been technical developments for increasing secondary ionization yields. For example, Cs flooding technique has been suggested [e.g. 7 and 8] to enhance negative ion counts. Although the matrix dependent mass fractionation is probably caused by more complex mechanisms than simple differences of sputter rate between Fe-rich and Mg-rich olivines, achieving high ionization yields by supplying more Cs at the sputtering surface may help to decrease O-isotope SIMS matrix effects.  Fig. 2 Inverse proportion of volume-sputtering rate versus averaged O-isotope SIMS matrix effects.   Conclusions:  SIMS matrix effects are reproducible and can therefore be calibrated to high accuracy.  For example, two measurements of olivine composition with Fa34 in 2012 and 2013 agreed within 0.1 ‰ after correction.  Although there is some apparent heterogeneity in our Fa100 sample, a standard deviation of three measurements in 2012, 2013 and 2014 is 1.5 ‰. The reproducible correlation between Fa values and isotope fractionations imply the matrix effects can be corrected for by using the model curve and a reference point. References:  [1] Eiler et al. (1997) Chem. Geol. 138, 221-244. [2] Riciputi et al. (1998) Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 178, 81-112. [3] Andersen and Hinthorne (1973) Anal. Chem. 45, 1421-1438. [4] Plog et al. (1977) Surf. Sci. 67, 565-580. [5] Kita et al. (2010) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 74, 6610-6635. [6] Delline et al. (1978) Appl. Phys. Lett. 33, 578. [7] Bernheim et al. (1979) Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry SIMS II. [8] Wirtz and Migeon (2004) Appl. Surf. Sci., 231-232, 15, 940-944. [9] Philipp et al. (2007) Int.. J. Mass Spectrom. 264, 1, 70-83.  