 JWST NIRISS SIMULATIONS AND ANALYSIS OF VULCANISM ON IO   Deepashri Thatte1, Alexandra Greenbaum2, Chima McGruder3, John Stansberry4, Anand Sivaramakrishnan5, 1Space Telescope Science Institute (3700 San Martin Drive Baltimore MD 21218, thatte@stsci.edu), 2Johns Hopkins University (Department of Physics & Astronomy, 3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, agreenba@pha.jhu.edu), 3University of Tennessee, Knoxville (220 19th street #4102, Knoxville, TN, 37916), 4Space Telescope Science Institute (3700 San Martin Drive Baltimore MD 21218, jstans@stsci.edu), 5Space Telescope Science Institute (3700 San Martin Drive Baltimore MD 21218, anand@stsci.edu)   Introduction:  We present simulated JWST observations of volcanic eruptions on Jupiter's innermost moon Io. We use the Aperture Masking Interferometry (AMI) mode of JWST's NIRISS (Near-InfraRed Imager and Slitless Spectrgraph), which utilizes a 7-hole non-redundant mask (NRM) in its pupil plane.  When JWST is launched in 2018 NIRISS' AMI mode will be the first time NRM is used in space. In addition to high-resolution imaging with moderate contrast, the NRM provides better astrometric accuracy over a wide field of view than regular imaging [1]. The AMI mode can use F380M, F430M, F480M filters, which are well matched to emission from Io's 500 K to 2000 K lava flows, although Jovian methane emission may generate too much stray light in F480M. Accurate high-cadence photometry of the eruptions in some or all filters will provide uniquely powerful insights into short-term variability, eruption temperatures and active areas, and long-term trends in activity for individual calderas on Io. These data could also provide new measurements of the global distribution of vulcanism on Io, improving constraints on the depth and location of tidal heating in the interior.   The non-redundant aperture mask turns the full aperture of the telescope into an interferometric array, which yields an interferogram created by several coherent fringe patterns overlaid across one another. The longest baseline provides a resolution of 0.5λ/D (~75 mas), as compared to the full aperture Rayleigh criterion limit of 1.22λ/D (where D is the telescope diameter or the longest baseline and λ is the observing wavelength). From the ground NRM performance is limited by the atmospheric instabilities, as short scale time variability inherent in adaptive optics-corrected point-spread functions (PSFs) makes calibration of NRM (using point sources) difficult.  NRM on a stable space telescope should enable higher contrast than the ground-based NRM with comparable exposure depth.   Io will be observable with JWST when it is 4.6 to 5.3 AU from JWST. Its 3642 km diameter will typically span 16 NIRISS pixels, with its pixel scale of approximately 65 mas. It can be placed at four different dither positions on the 80 × 80 pixel fast readout subarray designated for the AMI mode. The FITS file containing the exposure at each dither position is made up of slices, one for each integration, and each such integration is made up of multiple nondestructive frames. In practice each non-destructive frame samples the signal every 75 milliseconds in the 80 × 80 AMI subarray, so the count rate can be accurately measured even for sources that would saturate in less than one second. Figure 1 illustrates the results of our data modeling for a case with four active eruptions on Io. We also incorporate the effects of read noise, Poisson noise, dark current, sky background, and dither-position uncertainties. With assumed temperatures and radii we estimate the count rate of Io disc to be 25000 photons/sec/pixel, the count rate of Loki to be 5.4 × 105 photons/second, the count rate from bright events 2.8 × 106 photons/second and the count rate from typical event as 4 × 104 photons/second with NRM and F430M. We consider the volcanoes as point sources. When the count rate image is convolved with the model input image created using PSF simulation tool WebbPSF [2], both Io's sunlit disk (IR albedo assumed to be 0.5) and emission from volcanic sources is visible. Emission from the eruptive centers is more readily apparent in disk-subtracted images, as shown in the bottom panels of the figure, including emission from the fainter sources. Note that the simulated data (panel d) shown here is for a single AMI integration of 0.45 seconds. In our simulations each exposure is made up of 18 such integrations.  Our analysis of the simulations pinpoints the locations of four active volcanic eruptions measured using astrometric methods and also measures the properties of their emission. We create a perfectly symmetric noiseless analytical PSF using Lacour-Greenbaum (LG) image-plane algorithm [3]; the cross-correlation of this PSF with the data yields astrometric measurements [4] of locations of the volcanoes.  To explore the ability of NIRISS AMI to resolve closely spaced eruptions, we simulated a bright event and Loki at separations of 88 mas and 177 mas respectively from each other.  The results are as encouraging [5] as those shown in Figure 1. Even closely spaced eruptions ap pear to be resolvable in the raw model images once the disk of Io has been subtracted.  Using deconvolution or other more advanced techniques, it should be possible to retrieve much clearer images, reflecting a wealth of detail across the disk of Io.  SO2 frost, with an absorption at about 4.1 µm, is also of interest.  While NIRISS lacks an appropriate filter in AMI mode, both NIRCam and NIRSpec could be used to characterize SO2, albeit at lower spatial resolution.  Keszthelyi et al. [6] discuss possible observations of outer planet satellites with other JWST instruments.  Our initial efforts at modeling AMI observations of Io volcanism are very promising. NIRISS has the potential to acquire remarkable and unique data constraining volcanism on Io. The volcanic emission from even fairly typical eruptions is visible in the raw simulated images for exposures of only a few tens of seconds. We hope to explore this application of AMI further by modeling scattered light gradients across the scene, and applying deconvolution to retrieve images that reflect more clearly the ~70 mas spatial resolution that should be achievable from the data.     Figure 1. Panel a shows count rate image of Io with Loki, two bright events and one typical event that is used as an input image, Panel b is the NRM PSF of a point-source created using WebbPSF for F430M filter. Panel c shows the convolution of input image with NRM PSF and panel d is the simulated data (one integration). Panels e and f are the difference images obtained by subtracting simulated Io image without volcanoes from simulated Io image with volcanoes. To pinpoint the location of two fainter volcanoes, we first simulated the data with two bright events (Panel e) and then with two bright and two fainter events (Panel f). A comparison of Panels e and f reveals the location of two fainter volcanoes that are indicated by arrows in Panel f. The dimensions of Panels a, b and c are in 11x oversampled pixels and are displayed with linear stretch. Panels d, e and f are binned to the NIRISS pixel scale and are displayed using a squared stretch.    References:  [1] Dupuy, T. J., Liu, M. C. and Ireland, M. J. (2011),  EPJ Web of Conferences, Vol 16, 04004 [2] Perrin, M., Sivaramakrishnan, A., Lajoie C-P. et al. (2014), Proc. SPIE 9143, Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2014: Optical, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave, 91433X [3] Greenbaum, A., Pueyo, L., Sivaramakrishnan, A., and Lacour, S. (2015), ApJ, 798, 68 [4] Thatte, D., Greenbaum, A., Martel, A. et al. (2015), Proc. SPIE 9605, Techniques and Instrumentation for Detection of Exoplanets VII, 96052F  [5] Thatte, D., Sivaramakrishnan, A., Stansberry, J. (2015) STScI Newsletter, Vol 32, Issue 02 [6] Keszthelyi, L., Grudy, W., Stansberry, J., et al. (2016), PASP, 128, 018006, in press 