 STUDENT ORGANIZED RESEARCH VIA HIGH-ALTITUDE BALLOON INVESTIGATIONS: UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT INSTUMENTATION PROJECT.  R. B. Gamblin 1; E. A. Bering 1; D. Canales 1; M. Nowling 1; A. Ehteshami 1; H. Ahmad 1; B. Lefer 2; E. Marrero 1; M. Pina 1; J. Cao 1; D. Hermosillo 1; B. J. Dunbar 3; University of Houston (4800 Calhoun, Houston, TX 77004, rbgamblin@live.com), 2 Earth Sciences Division, NASA, 3 Department of Aerospace Engineering Texas A&M.   Abstract:  The Undergraduate Student Instrumentation Project (USIP) is a program of funding generated by NASA's Wallops Flight Facility. This program provides a platform for students to design a novel or improved measuring device for airborne measurements, and then build, test, and use their device. At the University of Houston, this USIP program has been shaped by its students and professors into so much more. Method.  Engaging undergraduate students in the research world from beginning to end, the USIP-UH project takes an interdisciplinary team of 12 - 25 undergradaute students with no academic research experience, and teaches the technology development process to the students. Interdisciplinary student majors include engineering, physics, mathematics, atmospheric sciences, education, psychology, and more. The students then organize themselves into project teams, set their own research objectives and methods, carry out their plans with student management and faculty mentors guideing them through the research and publication process. At the University of Houston we have unique resources that make instruments for highaltitude balloon especially interesting and beneficial for learning, and so our instruments are geared towards this launch method.  Figure 1. Interdisciplinary undergraduate research team Results.  The result of this approach using "of the students, by the students, for the students" spirit was a two year technology development research campaign that was capped by a three week field effort, with an invigorated student legacy strong enough to ensure future generations of students get the same opportunity. During the first iteration of the project, to investigate the upper atmosphere and Aurora Borealis, seven unique instrumentation devices were developed, then integrated into five different balloon payloads, flown on seven different flights, and used to collect field data for thirteen different students and three leading professors.  Future Work.  With the upcoming second iteration (USIP-UH-II) gearing up for its inaugural organizational meeting, 26 students will decide science objectives and begin design work on instrumentation technology improvements for a new field campagin. We will be adding planetary science objectives to our student priorities. We are currently investigating interesting challenges or methods in this area.  