 CHARACTERIZING VESTA'S SURFACE ROUGHNESS USING HIGH-INCIDENCE BISTATIC RADAR OBSERVATIONS BY THE DAWN COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA.  E. M. Palmer1, E. Heggy2,1, W. W. Kofman3, M. Moghaddam2. 1Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI, USA, 2University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 3CNRS-INSU, Institut de Planétologie et d'Astrophysique de Grenoble (IPAG) UMR 5274, Grenoble, France.  Introduction:   The first orbital bistatic radar (BSR) observations of a small body have been conducted opportunistically by NASA's Dawn spacecraft at Asteroid Vesta using the highgain X-band telecommunications antenna (HGA) aboard Dawn to transmit and the Deep Space Network (DSN) 70meter antennas on Earth to receive. BSR experiments have been used over the past decades to assess the textural (and in some cases, dielectric) properties of the surfaces of Mercury, Venus, the Moon, Mars and Titan [1]. Unlike Dawn's BSR observations of Vesta, however, most were non-opportunistic experiments, conducted much closer to Earth (with the exception of Titan), at much lower angles of incidence (<80°), and at much greater relative orbital speeds when compared with the rotation of the target's surface below (~3.4 km/s as in the case of the Mars Global Surveyor; ~200 m/s in the case of Dawn at Vesta), hence allowing measurable Doppler shifts between surface echoes and the direct signal. Analysis of radar data from the Vesta BSR experiment therefore requires significantly shorter integration time and much higher frequency resolution when measuring the surface Doppler shift in order to successfully distinguish surface echoes from the strong signature of the carrier (direct) signal among the resulting power spectra [2]. Using power spectrum signal analysis, we constrain the ambiguity of Vesta's surface roughness parameter, as well as its application in understanding the textural evolution of the surface, by measuring the radar cross section σ from each detected surface echo—designated σ0 when normalized to the surface area of the radar footprint—and from this deriving the root-mean-square (RMS) slope of the observed surface area. Through the comparison of RMS slope measurements to those of the Moon and icy Galilean satellites, we assess the dominant processes that have influenced Vesta's surface roughness at centimeter and decimeter scales [3]. Surface roughness in turn provides insight into the shock history of the body, such as through the identification of secondary impacts, or of thermal erosion stress fractures caused by diurnal expansion and contraction of volatiles within the surface material. Characterizing the textural properties of Vesta's surface is applicable to assisting future landing, sampling and orbital missions of other small bodies, as surface roughness is important for assessing landing safety, surface trafficability and for identifying ideal sites for potential sample collection [4].  Observation Geometry & Experimental Challenges:   Dawn's HGA was used to transmit telemetry data at Xband radar frequency (8.54 GHz, 4 cm wavelength), while the 70-m DSN antenna on Earth at Goldstone (US) was used to receive [Fig. 1]. The HGA continuously transmitted right-hand circularly polarized (RCP) radio waves, and due to the opportunistic nature of the experiment, remained in a fixed orientation pointed toward Earth throughout each BSR observation [5]. As a consequence, Dawn's transmitted radio waves scattered from Vesta's surface just before and after each occultation of the Dawn spacecraft behind Vesta, resulting in surface echoes at highly oblique incidence angles of >85°. Unlike observations at lower angles of incidence, these are in the regime of forward scattering, by which the polarization of the transmitted wave is conserved even after reflection from the target's surface. As a consequence, we cannot use the typical technique of measuring circular polarization ratio (CPR) to evaluate surface roughness or the dielectric constant from our surface echoes [3]. Furthermore, given the relatively slow orbital velocity (~200 m/s) of Dawn compared to the rotation of Vesta—a distinct and important contrast from BSR experiments that have been conducted at larger bodies such as Mars [1], which have stronger gravity fields that give rise to higher relative orbital velocities (e.g. ~3.4 km/s of the Mars Global Surveyor around Mars)—we therefore expect only a small Doppler shift between the directly transmitted signal and echoes from Vesta's surface, which in turn requires a high frequency resolution and a low integration time in order to distinguish echoes from the direct signal. The spacecraft's trajectory was also designed so that its solar panels were constantly in sunlight, such that its primary instruments would have maximized visibility of Vesta's sunlit surface throughout each orbit [Fig. 1] [5]. As a consequence, while Dawn followed a polar orbit around Vesta, the sites intercepted by Dawn's HGA beam, yielding surface echoes, are instead located at mid-latitudes between 30°S and 45°N [Fig. 2].  Figure 1. Typical orbital geometry of Dawn spacecraft during bistatic radar observations of Vesta (not to scale). Dawn's orbital plane is tilted with respect to Earth's line of sight.  Figure 2. Sites of detected surface echoes on an equirectangular projection of Vesta's surface. Each number corresponds to a single occultation event.  Method of Bistatic Radar Data Analysis:   Radio waves received by the DSN 70-meter antennas are recorded as amplitude vs. time, and collected in two channels: RCP and LCP. Within each channel, the amplitude data is then recorded in two components: "inphase" I and "quadrature" Q [6]. The IQ data is next converted into the frequency domain by taking the complex FFT, and the result is squared to generate a power spectrum—although the amount of time over which to generate each spectrum is selected only after assessing the theoretical Doppler separation between the direct signal and any surface echoes, as this dictates the frequency resolution necessary to accurately distinguish the two. This Doppler shift is calculated using the known relative positions and line-of-sight velocities between Vesta, Dawn and Earth as reconstructed from SPICE ephemeride data. Next, in order to assess the surface geophysical properties that contribute to the observed surface echoes, the radar cross section σ of Vesta's surface is calculated from the bistatic radar equation, which depends on the acquisition geometry, radar wavelength, power transmitted, and received echo power [2]. The resulting σ is then normalized to the illuminated surface area Aillum, such that σ = σ0Aillum. When estimating Aillum based on the known geometry of the experiment, the effects of shadowing become important at such high, grazing incidence, and in the case of forward scatter, will diminish the amount of surface area that physically contributes to the reflection [2]. If, however, we simplify our approximation of Aillum to that of an elongated ellipse, we can estimate Aillum by projecting the circular area of the high-gain antenna beam onto a curved surface. Next, in order to provide direct comparison of the results of the Dawn BSR experiment with the geophysical properties of other small bodies' surfaces, Hagfors' Law [1] is used to calculate the root-mean-square (RMS) surface slope using (1) estimated surface reflectivity based on the surface's dielectric properties at ~89° incidence (Palmer et al., 2015) and (2) the measured radar cross section σ0 from each echo site. Measurements of σ0 cannot be directly compared with those of other surfaces, since we predominantly observe the specular component of surface echoes in this acquisition geometry, unlike most BSR observations—which observe the diffuse component of the radar backscatter.  Results and Discussion:   The theoretical Doppler separation between the direct signal and surface echo is calculated to be -2 Hz during occultation entry on December 24, 2011 from SPICE geometry, consistent with the expectation of a small frequency separation due to Dawn's low orbital velocity. This is significantly smaller than observed in typical BSR experiments at larger planetary bodies. Power spectra were therefore generated with a frequency resolution of ~0.4 Hz and a temporal resolution of ~5 seconds in order to distinguish surface echoes from the direct signal [Fig. 3]. Using the narrow HGA beamwidth of 1.2° [7], high angle of incidence of ~89° and known geometry of Dawn's orbit around Vesta to estimate the area illuminated on Vesta's surface, we find that σ0 ranges from -8 dB to -16 dB among the observed surface echoes. Considering a dielectric constant of ~2.4 for Vesta's regolith material [8], Hagfors' Law yields RMS surface slopes that range from 3° to 19° over the observed surface. While past radar observations suggest that Vesta's surface is significantly rougher than the Moon at centimeter and decimeter scales [9], nine out of the 16 measured surface echo reflections from Vesta exhibit comparable RMS surface slopes of 3° to 9°. The remaining seven sites exhibit RMS slopes of 12° to 19°, which have been observed on the Moon along crater walls and over ejecta blankets [10]. Results from the BSR experiment at Vesta are consistent with the observed higher crater density over the Vestan surface and more exaggerated large-scale topography as a result of its much weaker gravity environment.  Acknowledgements: The authors thank Dr. Christopher Russell (UCLA), Dr. Carol Raymond (JPL), Sami Asmar (JPL) and Daniel Kahan (JPL) for their substantial support during data collection and analysis. Palmer was funded by a student research grant at UCLA and a teaching assistantship at WMU. This work is currently funded under the NASA Planetary Geology and Geophysics program (WBS 811073.02.01.07.05).  Key References: [1] Simpson et al., 2011. [2] Willis & Griffiths, 2007. [3] Thompson et al., 2011. [4] ElShafie & Heggy, 2013. [5] Russell & Raymond, 2012. [6] Asmar et al., 2016. [7] Taylor, 2009. [8] Palmer et al., 2015. [9] Mitchell et al., 1996. [10] Rosenburg et al., 2011. Figure 3. Typical received radar signal during entry and exit from occultation. 