3062.PDF
THE STABILITY OF LATERAL HETEROGENEITIES IN THE MARTIAN MANTLE D. Breuer1 and A.-C. Plesa1 1German Aerospace Center (DLR), Berlin, Germany (doris.breuer@dlr.de).   Introduction:  Isotopic anomalies in the Martian meteorites suggest the existence of various distinct geochemical reservoirs that formed in the first ~ 10100 Ma after the calcium- alluminium rich inclusions (CAI) and did not mix thereafter [e.g., 1]. The size and the location of the reservoirs are not known. However, it is suggested that two of these reservoirs that are depleted in incompatible elements are most likely located in the mantle, whereas a third enriched reservoir may reside in the crust [2].  A homogeneous mantle has been assumed in most thermal evolution models for Mars that aim at modeling the crustal and magnetic field evolution [e.g., 3,4]. In these models, the mantle is in the stagnant lid mode and well mixed by convection. Thus, for this scenario to be consistent with geochemical constraints, early formed reservoirs either primordial or depleted must be located near the surface, i.e. in the stagnant lid, rather than in the convecting mantle. It has been shown that depleted and enriched (primordial) reservoirs can form in the first million years and remain stable when the stagnant lid grows rapidly and faster than the crust [5,6]. Alternatively, reservoir formation due to fractional crystallization of a global magma ocean with a subsequent overturn has been suggested [7].  This scenario, however, is difficult to reconcile with the suggested thin elastic lithosphere thickness during the Noachian [8] and further predicts a lower concentration of radiogenic heat sources in the crust than that obtained from gamma-ray spectrometer data [9]. The latter is the consequence of magma ocean overturn during which strongly depleted material from the lower mantle is transported toward the surface where it partially melts and produces a primordial crust.  An aspect that has not yet been studied is the formation and stability of early reservoirs due to localized melting events such as large impacts after planet and core formation. Current models that study the influence of impacts (e.g., for the formation of the crustal dichotomy) do not consider the effects of melting on dehydration and composition -- they rather focus on the temperature influence of these impacts on mantle dynamics [e.g., 10]. During melting, water present in the mantle minerals as other incompatible elements are preferentially enriched in the liquid phase. As a consequence, they will be extracted from the mantle during the crustal formation process. With mantle dehydration, the viscosity increases and directly impacts on the interior dynamics. Furthemore, partial melting can induce a compositional change, i.e., the rise of partial melt leaves behind a compositionally buoyant residual mantle. Values in the literature for the maximal density difference between primordial and depleted mantle vary between 36 and 68 kg/m3 for a degree of melting of about 30% [see references in 6]. Thus, sufficiently large impacts locally melt the upper mantle, melt segregation then may form a reservoir depleted in water, radioactive elements and crustal components. These reservoirs differ from the background mantle in viscosity and density. In a preliminary study, we have modelled the mixing of such reservoirs in a 2D thermal evolution model using Mars-like parameters.   Model:  We model the mantle convection with extended Bousinesque approximation and a temperature and pressure dependent viscosity in 2D cylindrical geometry [11]. Our models account for the decay of radioactive elements and we use the model by [12] for the concentration of heat producing elements in th eprimitive mantle. These heat producing elements are distributed between crust and mantle according to [9] with an average crustal thickness of 45 km. We further imply a cooling core boundary condition at the core-mantle boundary (CMB). We assume an initial mantle temperature of 1650 K and a reference viscosity (r) of 1020 Pas at a reference temperature of 1600 K for the homogeneous mantle that is prone to convection. In the convecting mantle, we introduce two regions (component A (blue) and B (red) in Fig. 1) each with a radius of 510 km that differ in reference viscosity and/or density from the background mantle to study the efficiency of reservoir mixing. We trace component A and B with time for the entire thermal evolution of 4.5 Gyr. Note that we do not consider a temperature anomaly that might be associated with an impact forming a local reservoir.  Results:  The two initially water depleted reservoirs (component A and component B) with respect to the background mantle are chosen such that, the viscosity of component A is one order of magnitude higher, while the viscosity of component B is two orders of magnitude higher than the background viscosity. While component A mixes within 1000 Myr, small parts of the higly viscous component B remain trapped in the stagnant lid and are still visible after 4500 Myr (Fig. 1a). In Fig. 1b, component A and B have a viscosity, which is two orders of magnitude higher than the background viscosity. Additionally, component A is  3062.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
 a  b Figure 1: Evolution of localized mantle reservoirs using Mars-like parameters similar to case 36 from Plesa et al. (2015) with temperature and depth dependent viscosity and a reference viscosity of 1020 Pas, activation energy of E=300 kJ/mol and activation volume of V = 6 10-6 m3/mol. a) the reservoirs have a different reference viscosity as compared to the homogeneous mantle, i.e. rA = 10 r (component A) and a more viscous region with rB = 100 r (component B) but the same density. b) the reservoirs are both more viscous than the ho-mogeneous mantle, with rA =rB = 100 r and com-ponent A is 60kg/m3 lighter, while component B is 60 kg/m3 denser than the background mantle.  60 kg/m3 lighter, while component B is 60 kg/m3 denser than the background mantle. (Assuming a reservoir with a higher density considers that fractional crystallization may lead to a denser phase at the end of crystallization.) The dense component B sinks rapidly and accumulates in a layer above the CMB. The heat from the core and from the radioactive heat sources in this deep reservoir is not sufficient to thermally destabilize this layer -- this reservoir remains 'invisible' and would not serve as a potential reservoir for martain meteorites. Instead, the light component A rises to the surface and spreads below the stagnant lid. As a consequence of dehydration and increase in viscosity, this layer spreads only underneath one hemisphere -- a lateral heterogeneous mantle in the upper mantle can be maintained and the early formed reservoir can be tapped by hot upwelling mantle flow later in the evolution.  Conclusions:  The mixing time of local reservoirs depends on the density and viscosity difference between reservoir and background mantle. It has been shown with a simple numerical experiment that a localized reservoir may remain stable for the entire planetary evolution if a density difference is associated with the reservoir formation - only a viscosity variation due to dehydration stiffening is not sufficient. In the specific case shown (Fig. 1b), a dehydrated and less dense region with a radius of 510 km and a density contrast of 60 kg m-3 with respect to the background mantle extends underneath the stagnant lid of one hemisphere and does not mix with the mantle. Such a reservoir could remain stable and is also traceable by volcanism later in the evolution. However, it should be noted that early formed reservoirs can be 'protected' against mixing in the stagnant lid as also shown in other studies [5,6]. Protected reservoirs in the stagnant lid can even comprise a larger volume considering that an impact may not just produce a distinct and early reservoir below the crust and lithosphere as simplified in the present study but a reservoir reaching close to the surface.    [1] Mezger K, Debaille V., Kleine T. (2013) Space Science Reviews 174. [2] Humayun et al. (2013) Nature, 503 [3] Hauck S. A. and Phillips R. P. (2002) JGR 107 (E7). [4] Morschhauser A. et al. (2011) Icarus, 212. [5] Plesa A.-C. and Breuer D. (2014) Planetary Space Science, 98 [6] Ruedas T., Tackley, P.J. and Solomon S.C. (2013) PEPI, 220 [7] Elkins-Tanton, L., Parmentier E.M., Hess P.C. (2003) Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 38 [8] Plesa, A.-C., Tosi N., Breuer D. (2014) EPSL, 403 [9] Hahn B. C. et al. (2011) GRL, 38, 14. [10] Golabek et al. (2011) Icarus, 215 [11] Plesa A.-C., Tosi N., Grott M., Breuer D. (2015) GRL, 42 [12] Wänke H. and Dreibus G. (1994) Philos.  Trans. R. Soc. London, A349.   3062.pdf
47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2016)
